CATE
Student Handbook
2024-2025
< Table of Contents
CATE STUDENT HANDBOOK
2
The Student Handbook is intended to guide daily student life on
the Mesa and is written for students. No publication, however,
can reliably describe every situation that may arise during a Cate
student’s life. Students are encouraged to communicate with
the Student Services Office if any of the School’s policies and
expectations are unclear.
MISSION
Through commitment, scholarship, companionship, and service, each member of the Cate community
contributes to what our founder called “ . . . the spirit of this place . . . all compounded of beauty and
virtue, quiet study, vigorous play, and hard work.”
HONOR CODE
On my honor, I pledge: to be truthful; to show respect for all members of the Cate community and their
property; to complete my work honorably without giving or receiving unauthorized help.
INCLUSION
At Cate School, diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) work is integral to our mission because productive
citizenship and academic excellence are impossible without intercultural competency. Continually
honing these skills is essential to ensuring that each member of the Cate community feels a genuine
sense of belonging and can achieve their greatest growth. At Cate, the “spirit of this place” is rooted
in the full recognition of the dignity of each person. We encourage everyone at Cate to share their
background, interests, identities, and beliefs so that we can collectively work to broaden our perspectives,
deepen our capacity for empathy, and strengthen our resilience. In doing so, we continue the daily work
of building community.
CATE SCHOOL CONTACT
1960 Cate Mesa Road
Carpinteria, CA 93013
Switchboard 805-684-4127
MOD 805-698-4808
3
Table of Contents
Important Dates & Daily Schedule 5
School Breaks & Holidays with
Required Attendance 5
Schedule 6
Academic Life 7
Academic Policies 8 • Homework Limits and Guidelines
• Schoology: Planners and Grades
Report Cards, Transcripts, & Exams 8 • Letter Grades
• Passing vs. Promotable Grades
• Effort Marks
Attendance 9
Academic Support 10 • Supervised Study Hall
• Student Proctored Learning Labs
• Cate Academic Support Services
• Academically Initiated Student Support Plan
Awards 10 • Cum Laude Society
• Diploma with Honors
Campus Life 11
Communication and Support 12 • Advisors
• Class Advisors
• Prefects
• Seminar Teaching Assistants
Community Gatherings 13 • Meals
• Seated Meal
• Assembly
• Convocation
• Advisory Meeting
• Servons Speaker Series
• Community Conversations
• Commencement Weekend
Community Engagement 15 • Public Service Night
• Learning Center
• Los Niños
Servons Program: Community Chores 15
Weekend Activities 15
Dress & Appearance 16
Public Spaces & Facilities 16 • Dining Commons and Student Center
• Inquiry Collab
• Libraries
• Gyms
• Pools
• Dance Studio & Performing Arts Space
Communication & Technology 17 • Cell Phones
• Email
• Mail & Packages
• Internet Availability
Finances 19 • Student Accounts
• Credit Cards
Transportation 19 • School Shuttle
• Ride Sharing Services
• Automobiles
• Bicycles, Skateboards, Roller Skates/Blades,
Non-motorized Scooters, Etc.
Co-Curricular Programs 21
Athletic & Extracurricular 22 • Extracurricular Point System
• Athletic Equipment
• Independent Physical Education Option
• Medical Evaluation and Excuses
Outdoor Programs 23 • Outings Week
• Afternoon Outdoors Program
• Outdoors Equipment
Performing Arts 24 • Fall Theater Production
• Spring Musical Production Priority Protocol
• Dance
• Private Lessons
Residential Life 25
Dormitories, Dorm Life, & Dorm Facilities 26 • Community Guidelines for Residential Life in
All Dormitories
• Senior Responsibilities
• Wellness Checks
• Room Inspections & Dorm Chores
• Searches
• Storage
• Laundry
Moving In & Packing 28 • Fire Regulations Requirements
Student Visitation, Boundaries, & Sleepovers/
On-Campus Overnights 29 • Visitation during the Academic Day and study hours
• Common Space Visitation
• Interdorm Room Visitation
• Boundaries
• Sleepovers/On-Campus Overnights
• Off-Campus Visitors
Emergency Procedures 31 • Electric Power Failure
• Fire
• Earthquake
4
Day Student Life 33
Day Student within Residential Life 34 • Day student facilities and dorm use
• Evenings as a day student
School Commitments 35 • Attendance
• Requesting to miss commitments
• Day of missed commitment & Illness
Transportation & Driving 35 • Parking $ Drop Off
• Driving Other Students
• Driving during the academic day
Emergencies and Evacuations 36
Student Services 37
Wellness Services 38
Medical Services 38 • Services
• Missed Commitments due to Illness
• Required Healthcare Forms
• Health Insurance
• Outside Health Care Providers and Medical Appointments
• Medications
• Parental Notification of Health Services
• Confidentiality
Counseling Services 42 • Counseling Guidelines
Athletic Training Center & Sports Medicine 43 • Musculoskeletal Injury
• Head Injury
Student Services Committee 44 • Four Trimester Policy
Medical Leave or Withdrawal 44
College Counseling 45
College Board & ACT Testing 46
Outings Week & College Trips for 12th-Graders 46
Additional College Trips for 12th-Graders 46
Community Standards 47
Honor Code 47
Daily Standards 48
Minor Infractions 48
Detention Violation 48
Student Behavior Notice Tiers 49
Major School Rule Violations 49 • Cheating and Plagiarism
• Harassment and Other Inappropriate Conduct
• Sexual Harassment
• Incident Response Protocol
• Mandated Reporting
Academic & Student Concern Reporting and
Incident Response Protocol 52 • Response Protocol
• Honor Council
• Discipline Committee
• Administrative Response
• Discipline Responses: Tiered Levels of
Major School Rule
• Disciplinary Probation
• Drug Testing Policy
• College Disciplinary Notification
Health and Wellness Protocol 54
Sexual Intimacy Policy 55
Technology 56 • Acceptable Use Policy
Off-Campus Permissions 57 • Neighboring Properties
• Dinner Requests
• Boarder Expectations When Hosted by Day Families
• Special Permissions and Allocations
• Overnights to Faculty Homes on the Mesa
• School-Sponsored Off-Campus Overnights
Vacation Breaks & Travel 61 • Transportation Details.
• Travel Tips
• Travel Challenges
• Foreign Passports and I-20 Forms
< Table of Contents
Important
Dates & Schedule
CATE STUDENT HANDBOOK
5
SCHOOL BREAKS & HOLIDAYS WITH REQUIRED ATTENDANCE
Cate’s school year runs from late August to early June, divided into three trimesters. We have three major
breaks that are 1-2 weeks long: a fall break in November, a winter break in December, and a spring break
in March. Please find a detailed list of Important Dates here.
Please note that we run school programming with required attendance, including classes, on most federal
and religious holidays that do not fall over breaks. This includes but is not limited to:
• Labor Day (Sept)
• Indigenous Peoples’ Day (Oct)
• Veteran’s Day (Nov)
• Martin Luther King Day (Jan)
• President’s Day (Feb)
• Memorial Day (May)
Advance special permission from the Student Services Office is needed to miss commitments.
Please see the Permissions Section for more information on this process.
< Table of Contents
< Table of Contents
6 Important Dates & Schedule
WEEKLY TIMELINE
Time Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat
AM Residential
Life
Room /
Chore Check
Room /
Chore Check
Room /
Chore Check
Room /
Chore Check
Room /
Chore Check
1st Period
(8:30 - 9:35 AM)
A Block
(65 Min)
F Block
(65 Min)
C Block
(65 Min)
G Block
(65 Min)
D Block
(65 Min)
2nd Period
(9:40 - 10:45 AM)
B Block
(65 Min)
G Block
(65 Min)
D Block
(65 Min)
A Block
(65 Min)
E Block
(65 Min)
Community
(10:50 - 11:05 AM) Assembly Advisory Assembly Servons Assembly
Lunch Period
11:15 AM - 12:55 PM
Math, Science, Art,
HD Classes
11:15 AM - 12:20 PM
Eng, Hist,
Language Classes
11:50 AM - 12:55 PM
C Block
(65 Min)
A Block
(65 min)
E Block
(65 min)
B Block
(65 min)
F Block
(65 min)
4th Period
(1:00 - 2:05 PM)
D Block
(65 Min)
B Block
(65 Min)
F Block
(65 Min)
MO Block
(50 Min)
Ends 1:50 PM
ME Block
(50 Min)
Ends 1:50 PM
5th Period
(2:10 - 3:15 PM)
E Block
(65 Min)
MO Block
(65 Min)
ME Block
(65 Min)
C Block
(65 Min)
1:55 - 3:00 PM
G Block
(65 Min)
1:55 - 3:00 PM
Afternoon Block
(Sports or Other
Commitment)
3:30 - 5:00 PM
Afternoon
Block
(Starts at 3:45
Monday Only)
Afternoon
Block
Afternoon
Block
Afternoon
Block
Afternoon
Block
Varsity Sports Only
5:00 - 5:30 PM Varsity Varsity Varsity Varsity
Dinner, Clubs, Etc
5:00 - 7:00 PM
5:45 - 6:45 PM
Seated Meal
AM Residential
Life
7:15 - 7:50 PM
Dorm Meetings
Chore Check
Opt 2
7:00 - 7:45 PM
Campus Sign
In or Convo
Chore Check
Opt 2
7:00 - 7:45 PM
Campus Sign In
Chore Check
Opt 2
7:00 - 7:45 PM
Campus Sign In
Chore Check
Opt 2
7:00 - 7:45 PM
Campus Sign In
Chore Check
Opt 2
7:00 - 7:45 PM
Campus Sign In
7:00 - 7:45 PM
Campus Sign In
8:00 - 10:00 PM
Study Hours
8:00 - 10:00 PM
Study Hours
8:00 - 10:00 PM
Study Hours
8:00 - 10:00 PM
Study Hours
8:00 - 10:00 PM
Study Hours
10:30 PM
9th & 10th
Lights out
10:30 PM
9th & 10th
Lights out
10:30 PM
9th & 10th
Lights out
10:30 PM
9th & 10th
Lights out
10:30 PM
9th & 10th
Lights out
11:00 PM
11th Lights out,
12th In Dorm
11:00 PM
11th Lights out,
12th In Dorm
11:00 PM
11th Lights out,
12th In Dorm
11:00 PM
11th Lights out,
12th In Dorm
11:00 PM
11th Lights out,
12th In Dorm
11:30 PM
In Dorm
for All
11:30 PM
In Dorm
for All
12:00 AM
9th & 10th
Lights out
12:00 AM
9th & 10th
Lights out
CATE STUDENT HANDBOOK
7
< Table of Contents
Academic Life
CATE STUDENT HANDBOOK
“Cate believes in the power of human connection as the
foundation of learning and growth, that a diversity of
backgrounds and perspectives are essential for a thriving
community, and that learning is fueled by inquiry and
exploration.”
– Alexandra Lockett, Head of School
Cate School’s academic program aims to promote the greatest growth
possible for each student. While inquiry in teaching harkens back to
Socrates and John Dewey, Cate’s approach is distinctive in its coordination,
coherence, and consistency across all academic disciplines. Our students
develop inquiry skills, our faculty teaches with inquiry-based methods,
and our community engages together with our annual inquiry question
that frames our all-school summer read, our convocations series, and our
Senior Inquiry Day. Intentionally designing how our students, faculty, and
community engage with inquiry fosters our culture of inquiry at Cate.
< Table of Contents
< Table of Contents
8
ACADEMIC POLICIES
The specific details of the School’s academic program, including graduation requirements, course descriptions
and sequences, and scheduling and credit information, and course selection and add/drop processes, are
communicated to students and parents through the Cate School Academic Courses Registration Booklet
published online in January of each year. Current students are involved with academic planning and actual
course selections through conversations with the advisor, college office, teachers, and parents beginning in
late January. New students and families make course requests as part of the enrollment process in the spring.
Homework Limits and Guidelines
Lower School Courses (9th and 10th grade courses)
• Teachers may assign up to 40 minutes of homework for each class meeting.
Upper School Courses (11th and 12th grade courses)
• Teachers may assign up to 60 minutes of homework for each class meeting.
Schoology: Planners and Grades
• Teachers post planners to their Schoology page at least two weeks in advance.
• Planners make clear to students what the homework is and when major papers, projects, presentations,
and in-class assessments are due.
• Students with three or more major assessments on the same day may request an extension from one of
their teachers. The request must be made at least 72 hrs in advance.
• Teachers post running grades for the first time during the mid-trimester and thereafter, within two weeks
of the due date of a major graded assignment.
• Running grades represent the student’s current level of achievement in the course and is the grade the
student earns if the course were to end at that moment. These are visible only to students.
REPORT CARDS, TRANSCRIPTS, & EXAMS
Running grades and effort marks are shared with parents via Veracross at the mid-trimester and at the end
of each trimester. Grades published at the end of the trimester are accompanied by narrative comments that
provide information about student achievement, behavior, strengths, and growth areas. End-of-year grades in
full-year courses and trimester grades in trimester-long courses are published on a student’s Cate transcript.
For seniors, fall and spring trimester grades are also considered grades of record and are published on
transcripts sent to the colleges to which a student is applying. Narrative comments do not appear on
Cate transcripts.
Final exams, papers, or projects are administered in all full-credit courses at the end of the school year to
students completing the 9th, 10th, and 11th grades. A final exam, paper, or project may account for between
10% and 25% of the course grade. The weight is determined by the individual academic departments and
is consistently applied across common courses. Because these final exams are one marker for what a student
knows and can do at the end of the course, they may be used to determine or confirm the most appropriate
course placement for the next school year.
Questions about grades, effort marks, comments, or exams should be directed to the advisor and/or dean
of academics.
Letter Grades
The grade distribution at Cate generally falls between an A and a B-. Students who earn grades between an
A and a B- are working from the exceptional to the acceptable range of achievement in Cate courses. Students
who earn grades in the C+ range and below are identified as requiring additional academic support, including
intervention by the School. Grades at a C or below in two or more courses will result in the initiation of a
Student Support Plan and a re-enrollment contract may be withheld.
Academic Life
9
< Table of ContentsAcademic Life
Passing vs. Promotable Grades
A student who earns at least a C- in a course earns credit towards graduation with that course and may
be promoted to the next required course in the sequence, though summer work will be strongly urged. A
student who earns a C- in a course may not be promoted to the next course in sequence if the next course is
not required for graduation.
A student who earns a D in a course passes the course and thus earns credit toward graduation with that
course but may be required to repeat and earn at least a C- in the course before being promoted to the next
course in the sequence.
A student who earns an F in a course does not earn credit towards graduation with that course.
Effort Marks
In addition to the A–F grading system used for achievement, each student is also given an effort mark of
1 to 4, reflecting effort, classroom behavior, and attitude.
1 = Outstanding
2 = Good
3 = Needs improvement
4 = Unsatisfactory
Effort marks do not appear on Cate transcripts. Most students will earn a 2. Consistent evidence of
outstanding effort earns 1, and consistent evidence of concerning effort earns a 3. An effort mark of 4 is rare.
Effort marks of 3 or 4 in two or more courses may result in the initiation of a Student Support Plan.
ATTENDANCE
Consistent attendance in academic classes is essential for student growth and critical to the development of
skills and knowledge in each discipline.
• Absences due to illness, family emergency, health appointments scheduled by the Ellis House, religious
observance, or required Cate athletic contests or field trips are considered excused absences and are largely
out of the control of the student.
• Absences for college trips (for seniors only), club athletics, optional extracurriculars, and planned familyrequested events are considered discretionary excused absences and are limited in number (see below),
assuming the student is in good academic standing*. Students will be required to submit a Leave Request
Work Plan, which can be found on the Student Portal and Schoology Student Resources.
• Unexcused absences for cutting class, sleeping in, or exceeding the number of discretionary approved
absences will result in disciplinary action. If the total number of discretionary approved or unexcused
absences exceeds 20% in any one class (whether a full year or a trimester course), a student may fail to
receive credit for that course.
Permitted allocation of discretionary absences based on type:
• Seniors may miss no more than four days of school the entire year for college visits.
• Students may miss no more than two days of school per trimester or no more than six in the year for club
athletics or other non-Cate-sponsored extracurriculars.
• Students may not miss more than two days of school within eight weeks of each other for optional Cate
extracurriculars (Los Ninos, MUN, Round Square, SDLC).
• Anything beyond this would require a conversation with the Dean of Academics and Dean of Students.
* Students not in good academic standing may be denied permission to miss class even if the number is below
those listed above.
< Table of Contents
10
ACADEMIC SUPPORT
If students encounter academic difficulty, the first step is to seek support from their teachers and/or advisors.
If further support is needed, we offer the following:
Supervised Study Hall
Students who are experiencing academic difficulty or could benefit from a structured study environment
may be required or may volunteer to attend supervised study hall on Sunday-Thursday nights from 7:45
PM - 9:45 PM. This determination is made by the Dean of Academics, Director of CASS, and the advisor
after discussion with students’ dormitory faculty and classroom teachers. Students who choose to attend a
supervised study hall as an alternative to their rooms must commit to a regular study hall schedule that is
communicated to the Director of CASS.
Student-Proctored Learning Labs
Student-proctored learning labs are where students can visit a trained peer tutor for help with homework or
assessment preparation in a specific subject. Learning Labs are available on designated weeknights.
Cate Academic Support Services (CASS)
The mission of CASS is to assist students in achieving their full academic potential and serve as a resource
for parents and faculty. CASS is available to all students, both neurotypical and neurodiverse. However,
the support offered by CASS is temporary (six sessions) and provides students with targeted strategies
to maximize their executive functioning, approaches to learning, and study skills. Students who seek
academic support or have questions regarding their Cate Learning and Accommodation Plan may make an
appointment with CASS. The Director of CASS coordinates psycho-educational testing and serves as the
Student Services Coordinator for SAT/ACT accommodations.
Academically Initiated Student Support Plan
Starting at the end of the fall trimester and after each progress report, the Student Services Committee may
place a student on a Student Support Plan (SSP) if their report card shows two or more C’s or below or two
or more effort marks of 3 or 4. The Dean of Academics will notify parents in writing of any student placed
on an SSP, which could result in mandated supervised study hall and attendance at teacher office hours, as
well as the application of the Four-Trimester Policy.
For more information about Student Support Plans as a tool for wrap-around care, see here.
AWARDS
At the end-of-the-year awards ceremony, faculty recognize students in the lower and upper schools for
outstanding achievement in academics, arts, athletics, and service. Outstanding 12th-graders are recognized
with Commencement Awards during the graduation ceremony.
Cum Laude Society
Students are elected to the Society each spring by the faculty Cum Laude Committee based on achievement,
curiosity, and demonstrated interest in learning. Each year, membership is limited to no more than one-fifth
(20%) of the 12th-grade class.
Diploma with Honors
Diplomas are awarded at four levels: diploma, diploma with honors, diploma with high honors, and diploma
with highest honors. These distinctions are determined solely by cumulative grade point average and are
intended to recognize outstanding achievement in the top 25% of the graduating class.
Academic Life
CATE STUDENT HANDBOOK
11
< Table of Contents
Campus Life
The tone of the School stems from the quality of the day-to-day personal
interactions that make up the fabric of School life. The richness of
relationships among Cate students and faculty is a direct reflection of the
quality of the faculty and the collective talents, interests, and diversity of
the students. This mix is a powerful one with considerable potential to
achieve great things with astounding regularity while fostering an energetic,
productive, healthy, and happy community. These relationships often take
root outside the academic day, into the afternoon and evening hours, and on
weekends. Play rehearsals, club meetings, individual tutoring sessions, and
collaborative academic assignments extend the traditional school day. 
12
< Table of Contents
COMMUNICATION & SUPPORT
The individuals and offices listed below are among the most commonly accessed resources for students and
parents. Please review the School’s website for additional faculty contact information.
Cate School Switchboard: 805 684 4127
Cate School email: firstname_lastname@cate.org
Offices Contact(s) Ext.
Head of School Loretta Johnson, Exec. Assistant to Head of School 201
Academic Life Annalee Salcedo, Dean of Academics 271
Christina Weir, Dir. of Cate of Academic Support Services 295
Admissions Lynn Dinning, Director of Admissions Operations 217
Hayley Navarro, Admission Office Associate 292
Advancement Beth Engle, Advancement Associate 215
Athletics Wade Ransom, Director of Athletics 253
Business, Finance, Lisa Rockel, Accounts Receivable 262
and Accounts 261
Financial Assistance Vanessa Cruz Santana '06, Director of Enrollment & Financial Aid 261
Student Services Office Christina Gil, Office Manager 205
College Counseling Sara Boardman, Office Manager & Test Coordinator 277
Diversity, Equity, Inclusion Elana Stone, Director of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion 288
Health and Wellness Ellis House Health and Wellness Center Direct Line (805) 684-2807
MOD Monitor on Duty (805) 698-4808
School Leadership (not already listed above)
Head of School: Alex Lockett
Assistant Head of Operations and Finance: Sandi Pierce
Assistant Head for Students: Jay Dorion
Dean for Faculty: Troy Shapiro
Dean of Campus Life: Erin Hansen
Dean of Students: Bryan Rodriguez
Director of Residential Life: Shannon Drew
Director of Admissions: Kyle Mason
Director of College Counseling: Maude Bond
Director of Communications: Avani Shah
Medical Director: Susan Zapalac
Director of Counseling: Dean’a Curry
Advisors
New students are assigned an advisor through the collaborative efforts of the dean of students and the
director of admission. Advisors are the primary support system for advisees, and they take information
from and provide perspective to the rest of the faculty on behalf of the advisee. They are also a direct line
of communication with parents. Advisors support the academic, extracurricular, and social development
of their advisees and are the best resource to answer questions about an advisee’s adjustment to or
performance at Cate. 
13
< Table of ContentsCampus Life
Members of the faculty work with a small (4–6 students) group of advisees throughout the year. In keeping
with our student-centered program, returning students may request a new advisor at the end of any school
year for the following year. All such requests should emanate from the students themselves and go through
the dean of students.
Families are encouraged to communicate directly with their student’s advisor. Families can also expect midyear Zoom conferences and to receive advisor letters at the end of each year (June) that reflect their students’
experience and progress.
The School has various other student support mechanisms, which are noted below.
Class Advisors
Class advisors are faculty members who act as mentors and advocates for each grade. They keep a watchful
eye on the social dynamic of the class, work to promote class unity and act as spokespeople for the class to the
faculty. Class advisors also work closely with CPO volunteers who plan social functions for the classes.
Prefects
The prefects are a group of service-minded student leaders identified by the community and appointed by the
head of school at the end of their 11th-grade year. Prefects are selected based on their demonstrated respect
for the community, personal integrity, and positive impact on the community. Prefects act as intermediaries,
leading by example, doing informal counseling, and setting the tone for the rest of the school. Under the
guidance of the dean of campus life, director of residential life, and assistant head for students, the prefects
work closely with the dorm heads and day student advisor to ensure that the needs of the students are being
addressed in a timely manner.
Seminar Teaching Assistants
Freshman and sophomore seminar teaching assistants (TAs) are 12th-graders who have been selected to help
run the Human Development seminar classes. Their duties include teaching specific developmental topics,
assisting in classroom exercises, providing feedback and counsel to students, and serving as wise, reliable,
willing, available, and credible role models to their students.
COMMUNITY GATHERINGS
Meals
All meals are served buffet style, and dress is informal (except for scheduled seated meals on Monday
evenings). Boarding students (and day students who happen to be on campus) are expected to sign in with
the dorm faculty by 7:45 PM. All students (including day) are expected to attend scheduled seated meals.
Students are expected to display good table manners in the dining room and to clear their dishes to the
dishwashing area after eating. Dishes, glasses, or silverware may not be taken from the dining room.
Seated Meals
Seated dinner, which is required for all students and faculty, typically precedes convocation on many Monday
evenings and is occasionally before or after celebratory events. Seating is assigned and rotates regularly to
allow students and faculty to interact with various community members. Formal attire is generally required.
Assembly
The School community meets in the Hitchcock Theatre on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday mornings.
Assembly is an integral part of the school day; it is a time for students and faculty to make announcements
for the community’s benefit and spend a few leisurely moments together. Seating is assigned by advisory
groups, and attendance is taken. 
< Table of Contents
14
Convocation
Convocations are presented in the theater, generally run 30–45 minutes in length on Monday evenings,
and include presentations from within the Cate community and outside the School. Topics presented to
the community may be musical, instructional, cultural, dramatic, controversial, or simply entertaining.
Most directly, the program’s purpose is to expose students and faculty alike to ideas or experiences of value
that are not usually the province of a specific discipline or program.
Convocations are required for all students and faculty. Parents are encouraged to attend any of the
convocation programs; however, because space is limited in the dining room, the School cannot host
parents or families for seated meals that often precede convocation.
Advisory Meeting
Advisors gather with their advisory group every Tuesday morning, and the group has a chance to sit and talk
over bagels or other treats. Advisory is the only consistent meeting time that advisors have with their advisees
each week, though they also sit together at morning assemblies and convocations. Advisors also catch up with
their advisees in the dorms, in the dining hall, and around campus.
Servons Speaker Series
Most Thursday mornings – and many S-Saturdays – the Cate community gathers in the Katharine Thayer
Memorial Chapel to hear a brief talk by a 12th-grader or faculty member. The talks are most often highly
personal – sometimes funny, sometimes serious, and sometimes both. In all cases, they are reflective,
contemplative efforts to share our lives, our perspectives, and experiences that genuinely matter. Seating is
arranged by grade, and attendance is required.
Community Conversations
The goal of community conversations is to provide a space for the whole community to come together and
discuss topics that impact all of us and are rooted in diversity, equity, inclusion, and belonging. Community
Conversations take place 3 times each year in predetermined groups facilitated by a faculty member. They
are designed to build understanding through the gathering of diverse perspectives across our community,
facilitate relationships that may not be fostered in other spaces, and allow us to seek out alternative
perspectives and approach differing opinions with an inquiry mindset and willingness to listen and learn.
Commencement Weekend
For students, faculty, and families alike, the final week of school is one of the most poignant periods of the
school year. 9th, 10th, and 11th-graders are preparing for exams, while the 12th-graders have embarked upon
a set of closure activities designed to recognize their accomplishments and friendships and, we hope, ease the
transition from students to alumni. The key activities occur on the Saturday and Sunday of Commencement
Weekend. Students are required to attend these important culminating events. The business of packing,
cleaning, and bidding farewell to close friends is an all-encompassing process that we feel is as important to
students as the opening days.
The Awards Ceremony on the Saturday afternoon of Commencement Weekend recognizes the
extracurricular, athletic, and academic achievements of the students in the lower grades, as well as those of
12th-graders. All parents are invited to attend this ceremony, as well as the buffet dinner that follows it and
the Baccalaureate service later that evening. Commencement on Sunday morning typically begins at 10:00
AM and concludes by 1:00 PM. This ceremony is followed by a luncheon for the community.
Campus Life
15
< Table of Contents
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
Community engagement programs are an essential part of the Cate experience. These activities are organized
by the director of community engagement. Public Service Night is not mandatory, yet almost all students are
involved in it at some point in their Cate careers.
Community Engagement Days
In the Fall and Spring, classes are cancelled to allow students to serve the broader Santa Barbara Community.
Public Service Night
Each Wednesday night, 30 to 40 students and faculty visit homes for the elderly, physically or mentally
challenged, and the homeless in the local community. These visits are generally one hour in length.
While the list of participants changes from week to week, many students who become involved in this
unique program form close relationships with the residents and become devoted and regular participants in
the program.
Learning Center
During the athletic period, up to seven students leave the Mesa to tutor and mentor students in local
Carpinteria after-school programs. Working with individuals and small groups, Cate students become
teachers in English, Spanish, and math while serving an essential function for the local community.
Los Niños
Cate faculty and students head to Mexicali for two Los Niños trips each year. They help with concrete
projects at schools and engage with the local families in different colonias. The students stay in male and
female-identifying Los Niños facilities in Mexicali during these trips. There is a charge for participating
(for students on financial assistance; if your award covers this cost, the Director of Financial Assistance will
contact you directly).
SERVONS PROGRAM: COMMUNITY CHORES
The Servons program at Cate is intended to give all students the opportunity to serve the community
and take care of both the people and the place.
9th and 10th-graders take responsibility for the state of campus through service in the dining hall, the
recycling program, the composting program, and various buildings around campus.
In the 11th and 12th grade years, the student’s service shifts focus from the campus to people. All
11th-grade students are paired with new students to support their transition to Cate, and in the
12th-grade year, all seniors are expected to serve in a leadership role in an area to which they are
particularly passionate.
WEEKEND ACTIVITIES
The Activities Committee is a student committee led by the Dean of Campus Life. The primary goal of
the committee is to provide a diverse selection of weekend recreational activities both on and off campus.
Off-campus activities may include theater events, restaurants, bowling, ice skating, etc. On-campus events
may include movies, dances, coffee houses, dodgeball, and dorm competitions. The tasks of the committee
are to plan, organize, and implement these activities while coordinating them with the school calendar.
Additionally, faculty class advisors and the Cate Parents Organization plan, fund, and carry out a variety of
social functions throughout the year.
Campus Life
16
< Table of Contents
DRESS & APPEARANCE
At Cate School, we have three main categories of dress depending on the occasion. When not specified,
casual is the standard expectation.
Casual: Clothing should always be clean and tasteful. Students must wear shoes, a shirt, and pants/skirt or
dress (or the equivalent) that fully covers body parts and is not see-through—shirts and dresses must have a
fabric in the front, back, and sides. Clothing must cover undergarments (bra straps allowed).
Business Casual/Convo. Casual: casual blazers, polo shirts, collared shirts or button-down shirts, casual
slacks like khakis or chinos, blouses, and dresses or skirts. You may also wear appropriate ethnic, heritage, or
cultural dress used for important occasions. Sleek athletic shoes are permitted, but not athletic clothes, shorts,
or jeans.
Formal Attire: slacks, dresses, sports coats, skirts, blouses, and the like are appropriate and required. If a shirt
can accommodate a tie, a tie is required. While jeans and athletic clothes are not permitted, suits and formal
gowns are not necessary. You may also wear appropriate ethnic, heritage, or cultural dress used for important
occasions. Dress shoes.
PUBLIC SPACES & FACILITIES
Dining Commons and Student Center
Booth Commons, houses a kitchen and servery and an inviting dining hall that can seat the entire student
body. An outdoor patio adjacent to the Kirby quad creates additional eating areas for students. In addition
to the regular meal schedule, grab-and-go options are available throughout the day and into the evening. The
student center features two student activity conference rooms, an assortment of games and activities, and an
outdoor deck with a gas fire pit. The Blue Ewe, the student store, is also located on the upper level, where
students receive mail.
The Inquiry Collaborative
The Inquiry Collaborative is Cate’s new hub for academic and student life, opening in August 2024.
The Wykoff Library, the historic and beautifully renovated Macintosh Room, several new state of the art
classrooms (including those dedicated to computational thinking, digital arts/photography, and ceramics)
and Student Services offices provide the spaces, technologies, and teams necessary to support greatest growth
possible for students.
Libraries
Cate’s three libraries - the Johnson Library, the Wykoff Library, and the McBean Library - open at 7:30 AM
Monday through Saturday, at 9:30 AM on Sunday, and close at 10:00 PM nightly. The library office, now in
the Co-lab, is staffed from 8:00 AM–3:00 PM on weekdays, on some evenings during study hours, and from
8:30 AM–12:30 PM on S-Saturdays.
The Johnson Library, built in 1928 and largely maintained in its original state, the JL — as it is affectionately
known — provides a welcoming place for silent study and pleasure reading, and is a much-used space for
special lectures and meetings. The new Wykoff Library will house thousands of books and media and offer a
variety of study nooks for group or individual work. In 2024-2025 the McBean Library will serve as a multiuse study and work space for students and faculty alike.
Throughout our libraries, there are designated zones for different types of work: silent study, quiet study, and
group study. It is critical that students adhere to expectations.
Campus Life
< Table of Contents
Gyms
The School has two gymnasiums, the Fleischmann Gymnasium and the Sprague Gymnasium, adjacent to
the Donald Harcourt '50 Fitness Center (HFC). The HFC is available to students for resistance training
only after orientation and approval by our Strength and Conditioning Coach.
The HFC has supervised hours Monday through Friday from 6:15 AM to Study Hours for 9th, 10th, and
11th-graders and 6:15 AM to In-dorm for 12th-Graders. On weekends the gym is open from 6:15 AM to
in-dorm for all students as long as they are not missing any commitments.
Pools
The School has two pools as part of the Emmett-Horowitz Aquatic Center – a full-sized competition pool
and a much smaller recreational pool. Before using the pools, students must pass a swim test at the start of
the school year. The pools do not have adult supervision, and students may never swim alone; there must
always be at least three people in the pool area. There is no swimming unless the pool cover and cleaning
robot are completely removed, and students may not remove either without adult assistance. Students may
not be in the pool area after sundown or after 7:00 PM, whichever comes earlier. Students should shower
before entering either pool.
Dance Studio and Performing Arts Space
The E. L. Wiegand Center for the Performing Arts is a newly renovated space that includes a dance studio
and a multi-purpose space for musical group practice, yoga classes, and other activities. Natural light and
elements of the historic 1939 gym merge to create a modern space for artistic pursuits.
COMMUNICATION & TECHNOLOGY
Cell Phones
Cate is a community that places a high premium on face-to-face personal interaction, which is reflected in
our cell phone policy. Students are expected to be discreet when using their cell phones. They are not allowed
to use cell phones in class, during mandatory School functions, or in areas of campus where we want to
encourage personal interaction (i.e., public lawns, dining hall, pathways, etc.). The same holds for the use of
headphones and earbuds. To ensure that students have focused study time, they are only allowed to use cell
phones for academic purposes during study hours. The use of or the presence of cell phones on school trips
(including athletic trips and public service trips) is at the discretion of the faculty member(s) supervising the
trip. During the first few weeks of school, students must provide the Student Services Office with their cell
phone numbers to enable the School to contact students when necessary.
Email
Student email addresses are established for new students during the summer before they arrive. The School’s
generalized e-mail address uses firstname_lastname@cate.org; for example, bryan_rodriguez@cate.org.
Like any CateNet or network resource, the Cate email system (G-Suite for Education) hosted by Google,
including all information, documents, and messages sent and received, is the property of the School. Cate
users, thus, do not have any reasonable expectation of privacy regarding any information or messages sent or
received through the Cate email system. Cate reserves the right to access individual Cate email accounts and
messages at its discretion.
All users are strictly prohibited from sending e-mail messages of a harassing, intimidating, offensive, or
discriminatory nature. Such conduct or any other conduct in violation of this or any other Cate School
policy will result in disciplinary measures, up to and including separation from the School.
Campus Life
17
18
< Table of Contents
Mail and Packages
At the beginning of their year at Cate, every student is assigned a personal mailbox for letters, cards, and
college mail. Students keep this mailbox until they graduate. All new incoming students will receive an
email from the Cate Mail Center the first week of school with their mailbox number, combo, and
instructions on how to set up the Locker Hub accounts. Students may purchase postage stamps at the
Blue Ewe (our campus store) and mail their letters through the delivery bay drop box, both located in the
Booth Commons Building.
All packages sent to a student by an individual or vendor through ground or express/overnight courier are
delivered to the School and placed in the Locker Hub by Amazon. Students are notified via email or text
by the “Cate School Hub” when a package(s) have arrived for them, and the email will include a barcode to
be entered or scanned at the Locker Hub to retrieve the package at their convenience. While packages may
be delivered by courier on weekends, packages will not be processed or placed in the Hub until Monday.
It is not a good idea to send parcels for Saturday delivery, especially if the parcel includes perishable items.
*During the summer or breaks, any packages sent to the School will be held in storage until the students
until students arrive on campus.
The School reserves the right to inquire about and investigate anything mailed or delivered that School
personnel considers suspicious or potentially inappropriate. When such suspicion arises, the Dean of Students
is notified, and the student may be asked to open the package in question in their presence. No medication
or substance requiring a prescription should be mailed to a student, all such packages should be addressed to
the Medical Director, Dr. Susan Zapalac.
Each student is responsible for knowing the contents and makeup of items and/or packages that arrive at
their mailbox, and Cate students are not permitted to own or use an off-campus P.O. box.
All mail and packages should include the mailbox number in the mailing or ship-to address.
Example:
Student Name
Cate School
1960 Cate Mesa Rd. # XXX
Carpinteria, CA 93013
Internet Availability
Grade Sunday - Thursday Friday Saturday
9th & 10th 10:30 PM 11:30 PM 12:00 AM
11th 11:30 PM 12:00 AM 1:00 AM
12th 1:00 AM 1:00 AM 1:00 AM
Campus Life
< Table of Contents
FINANCES
For many parents and students, few practical matters are more challenging than those associated with money.
Below, we’ve outlined a few areas of finance. Please also consider routine living expenses such as school
supplies, pizza, and purchases in town.
Student Accounts
Students are assigned a charge account for which the parents are billed monthly. For many students, a School
charge account is their first encounter with a charge account of any type. This is an area in which parentstudent communication is critical. Typical charges include special textbooks or class materials distributed by
teachers throughout the school year, extracurricular trip costs (e.g., SCUBA, ski, or other voluntary school
trips), individual music lessons, and dorm apparel. Students who commit to voluntary optional trips where
advance reservation purchases (hotel, airfare, etc) are required will be charged even if they back out at the
last minute. Optional transportation costs (e.g., Santa Barbara Airbus to/from LAX at vacation breaks) can
be made with the parent’s specific permission. Charges for purchases made off campus cannot be billed to
student accounts. The School provides, at no charge, certain athletic equipment, including some protective
equipment and uniforms, but does not provide shoes or special athletic equipment (rackets, gloves, etc.) –
Some of which may be purchased through the Athletic Department.
Textbook purchases are made by each family individually online through BNC Direct before the start of the
school year. Instructions regarding textbook orders are on your Veracross portal, and communication will
come from the School in August each year when course lists are available, and the online textbooks store has
opened and is ready for orders.
TRANSPORTATION
School Shuttle
Students may walk, use bicycles, or take the school shuttle (see the posted schedule on the general for exact
times). The school shuttle goes to and from Carpinteria on Tuesdays, Thursdays, Fridays, Saturdays, and
Sundays. The school shuttle also drops off in Santa Barbara on Sunday afternoons. The school shuttle driver
oversees the bus and carries full authority over the school. Misconduct on the bus will be dealt with through
the usual disciplinary procedures.
Hitchhiking by Cate students is prohibited.
Ride-Sharing Services
On Saturdays or Sundays, students may take public transportation from Carpinteria to Santa Barbara if
they can return in time for Campus Sign-In at 7:45 PM. With ride-sharing services on the rise, we find that
students are arranging their own transportation to and from campus. Uber allows users to set up a Teen
Account where minors 13-17 can ride unaccompanied. Lyft, on the other hand, does not allow anyone under
the age of 18 in their vehicles. If you plan on using Uber while at Cate, we recommend setting up the Teen
Account with your parents before arriving at Cate. The Uber app will allow parents to oversee when, where,
and how their student is using the app. The School relies on the family to manage their child’s access and use
of ride-sharing on or off campus. Students who utilize any third-party transportation services must adhere to
the same policies regarding signing on and off-campus during designated time frames as would apply with
any Cate-provided form of transportation. Students must submit a RideShare Leave on Reach to notify the
security guard when expecting hired transportation for security purposes. Failure to do so will generally result
in the car service being turned away at the entrance to campus. The School strongly discourages the use of
these services as there is school-provided transportation off-campus. Parents are strongly encouraged to speak
with their children regarding the use of these transportation services. Parents sharing with their children the
Campus Life
19
20
< Table of Contents
use of their accounts with such services and permitting their children to travel unaccompanied through
such services to and from campus do so at their own risk. The School can take no responsibility for or
supervise the student’s use of third-party transportation services off-campus.
Automobiles
Only licensed day students are permitted to drive on the Mesa. The bullet points below detail the
School’s restrictions on and acceptable use of automobiles for Cate students.
• Boarding students may not keep or use a car on or off the Mesa while School is in session.
• With written permission from a parent on file with the Student Services Office, only 12th-grade
boarding students may ride in an automobile with a 12th-grade day student. They may also leave or
return to campus with a Cate parent or faculty/staff member. All other drivers require case-by-case
parent permission.
• Underclass students may not ride with anyone other than a Cate parent or faculty/staff member
unless they have prior authorized consent from the Student Services Office.
• All boarding students may ride with adults (non-Cate students) over the age of 18 only if parental
approval is given to the Student Services Office.
• Day student drivers need to know the Day Student & Parent section of this handbook for driving
guidelines that specifically apply to them.
Bicycles, Skateboards, Roller Skates/Blades, Non-motorized Scooters, Etc.
Students are welcome to bring bicycles, skateboards, roller skates/blades, or non-motorized scooters to
school. However, they may not have or operate motorcycles, motorized scooters, e-bikes, mopeds, or
hoverboards. Skateboarding, roller skating/blading, and scooter riding are permitted on the Mesa in
locations where the activity is not hazardous and does not interfere with the activities of others. Students
may not skateboard, roller skate/blade, or scooter down Cate Mesa Road, on the tennis courts, on the
science building or Chapel walkways, in the pool areas, on stairways, or in dormitory halls.
California state law requires anyone under the age of 18 to wear a helmet while riding a bicycle,
skateboard, roller skates/blades, or non-motorized scooter, and Cate requires that all students wear a
helmet regardless of their age. This applies to all school-sponsored activities as well as unsupervised trips a
student might take off school grounds.
Bicycles may be stored on dormitory balconies, but students are encouraged to use the bike racks
adjacent to High House Lido Dormitory. Bicycles may not be stored in dorm corridors, on landings, or
in public access areas. Students are urged to secure their bikes with a lock.
Campus Life
CATE STUDENT HANDBOOK
21
< Table of Contents
Co-Curricular
Programs
ATHLETIC & EXTRACURRICULAR
Because physical education classes are not scheduled into the academic day,
Cate students are required to participate in an afternoon activity. The director
of athletics oversees and manages a comprehensive athletic and extracurricular
program designed to provide students with the opportunity for challenges
in the context of hard work, collaboration, and fun. In order to complete
graduation requirements, students must attain their point standards as
outlined in the After-School and Athletic Requirements document. Students
are expected to attend all practices, meetings, and games, including those
on Friday afternoons and Saturdays. Attendance during the athletic and
extracurricular period is required unless excused by the Ellis House or a
member of the athletic training staff.
Between interscholastic teams and intramural activities, the offerings are highly diverse. Intramural activities
generally meet each weekday for an hour and a half. At the same time, interscholastic teams usually practice
three or four afternoons per week for up to two hours per day and games twice a week.
All athletic team game schedules are posted by sport on the Cate website at www.cate.org/athletics, and
directions to away games are also posted on the individual team pages. Please check the website regularly, as
schedules often change without much advance notice.
22
< Table of Contents
Extra-curricular Point System
Beginning with the 2024-2025 school year, Cate will be moving to a new system for tabulating
interscholastic sports graduation requirements. In the absence of offering physical education options during
the academic day, the interscholastic sports program is essential in helping students meet recommended
exercise goals, providing academic/life balance, and encouraging teamwork and cultivation of collaborationbased skills. By moving away from the grade-based participation mandates, the point system will increase
the autonomy and flexibility of student choice. While students will still have requirements, this system gives
more choice in how and when to meet these requirements. The system will require 15 points to graduate
for four-year Cate students. The point system reflects a commitment to the school-sponsored offerings while
recognizing the commitment of athletes who participate in club sports in an effort to build their skill set
and demonstrate commitment to important personal endeavors. These changes will allow for continued
participation in club sports. However, this exemption requires students to participate in the target sport on
a Cate team as a condition of their exemption. All four-year students must participate in 4 interscholastic
sports offerings during their time at Cate, with this being reduced by one per year for transfer students.
Point Allotments
Interscholastic Sport Offerings = 2 points
Cate Musical and Dance Arts Offerings = 1.5 points
Cate-Based Non-Interscholastic Offering = 1 point
Independent Club Sport Exemption = 0.5 point
Four Year Students = 15 points
Three Year and Repeat 9th Students = 11 points
Two Year and Repeat 10th Students = 7 points
Current Interscholastic Sports (2 points)
Fall
Boys Cross Country
Girls Cross Country
Football
Girls Tennis
Ultimate Disc
Girls Volleyball
Boys Water Polo
Winter
Boys Basketball
Girls Basketball
Boys Soccer
Girls Soccer
Surfing
Girls Water Polo
Spring
Baseball
Boys Lacrosse
Girls Lacrosse
Boys Swimming
Girls Swimming
Boys Tennis
Boys Track and Field
Girls Track and Field
Boys Volleyball
Current Non-Interscholastic Offerings (1.5 Point)
Fall
Dance
Winter
Dance
Spring
Spring Musical Leads
(Designated by Theater Director)
Current Non-Interscholastic Offerings (1 Point)
Fall
Strength and Conditioning
Learning Center
Independent Art
Fall Theater Production
Outdoor Sports Rotations
Winter
Strength and Conditioning
Learning Center
Independent Art
Rock Climbing
Spring
Strength and Conditioning
Learning Center
Yoga
Co-Curricular Programs
< Table of Contents
Athletic Equipment
Athletic equipment and uniforms are generally provided for all students on an issue-and-return basis. Failure
to return team equipment will result in billing charges for replacement. Personal equipment such as hats,
bathing suits, spandex shorts, batting gloves, lacrosse equipment, socks, personalized shirts, and personal
protective equipment are charged to the student’s account and become the student’s property after the season.
For students on financial assistance, if your award covers the cost of athletic equipment, these charges will be
removed from your student account.
Independent Physical Education Option
Students must be enrolled in an after-school option during each of the three seasons for the entire school
year. Students may choose to participate in independent physical education. This option is designed to
support a student who has demonstrated a clear passion and dedication to a specific activity. Students who
chose this path must still meet the point requirement. A meeting is required with the Director of Athletics
prior to a 9th-grader’s approval for activities outside of the traditional Cate program. For all students
considering an off-campus activity, no Cate-sponsored transportation will be provided. Families are required
to cover all costs associated with an IPEO.
Medical Evaluation and Excuses
Injuries and illness may be initially evaluated by either a registered nurse in the Ellis House or an athletic
trainer. Please see the ‘sports medicine’ section of this Handbook for additional information regarding sports
injuries. Medical excuses for sports are granted only by a nurse in the Ellis House or an athletic trainer. When
students miss class time because of illness or injury, the nurse will determine whether or not they are eligible
to participate in athletics that day. Although sometimes required to stay in the Ellis House when excused
from athletics for illness, students are often given a sports watch note, which must be taken in person to
the coach. Students are expected to remain at practice or the game site to watch, assist, or do homework
as appropriate. Alternatively, students may be sent to the Athletic Training Center for evaluation; students
are required to check in with the ATC on arrival. Students requesting athletics excuses to miss a practice
or a game should do so before noon, Monday–Friday, or before 11:00 AM on Saturdays. Students missing
athletics for medical reasons lasting more than three (3) days will require a note from a non-parent health
care provider stating the reason, activity limitations, and length of time for recovery of illness/injury. Excuses
from extracurriculars over two weeks require a medical leave approved by the Student Services Committee in
collaboration with the Medical Director and Athletic Trainer.
OUTDOOR PROGRAM
Outings Week
Every fall, all 9th, 10th, and 11th-graders participate in Outings Week; the objectives are to build a sense
of community within each class and between students and faculty and to expose students to the natural
beauty of California. The 9th-grade class uses the cabin and kitchen facilities of Pyles Boys Camp as a base
camp for a week of day hiking in the southern Sierra Nevada. The 10th-grade class spends the week in
small pods exploring the Yosemite Valley on a 20-mile backpacking trip. The 11th-grade class, also in small
pods, embarks on more ambitious routes in the Golden Trout Wilderness of the Kern River, Kings Canyon
National Park, or San Jacinto Mountains. Many seniors volunteer to join the 9th, 10th, or 11th-grade trips in
order to enjoy the outdoors and help support younger students, though some seniors opt to visit colleges in
preparation for their application process.
Afternoon Outdoors Program
The outdoor program is an athletic offering in the fall and winter athletic seasons. The fall season offering
includes exposure to surfing, sea kayaking, rock climbing, mountain biking, paddleboarding, and kayak
surfing. Students are grouped according to their levels of experience and abilities, and no prior experience
Co-Curricular Programs
23
24
< Table of Contents
is necessary. During the winter season, there is technical rock climbing and beginning and advanced surfing
(since space is limited, priority is usually given to more experienced surfers for this option). The outdoor
program enables enrolled students to learn various outdoor sports and skills throughout the year. Further,
there are frequent voluntary weekend overnights in the backcountry and even spontaneous trips with faculty
to the beach to surf or paddle board.
Outdoors Equipment
Whether it’s mountain biking, surfing, white water rafting, or climbing, the School is generally able to
provide students with all of the gear they need, and the cost of food and camping permits is typically covered
by the School. If that is not the case, parents and students will be informed of any additional costs before
departures. However, students are responsible for supplying their sleeping bags for overnight trips; before
Fall Outings Week, families will receive a letter detailing the equipment needed for those trips and purchase
options for sleeping bags. For students on financial assistance, your award may cover the cost of a sleeping
bag. The Director of Financial Assistance will be in touch with you directly. There is also an active SCUBA
club for certified divers, and the School sponsors courses for SCUBA certification for students new to the
sport. Most students rent their SCUBA gear. Additionally, every student in good academic standing has the
option of missing one day of classes each trimester to participate in one of our extended outdoor program
trips (parental permission is required).
PERFORMING ARTS
Cate offers many Performing Arts classes during the academic day. The programs listed below are offered
outside of the academic day.
Fall Theater Production
Most productions typically involve large casts and require a significant number of support technicians.
In the Fall, theater production is offered as an athletics option, and rehearsals occur during the afternoon
extracurricular block. The Fall production culminates in several performances during Fall Family Weekend.
Spring Musical Production Priority Protocol
In the spring, the School typically mounts an ambitious musical. In order to prioritize the enormous amount
of work and focus required to stage a musical, the School gives priority to the musical rehearsals during the
week and a half prior to opening night. The Assistant Head for Students will communicate in writing and an
assembly that the ten days of rehearsals during Production Week for the Spring Musical will be the priority
of all involved in the Spring Musical. In order to protect our students, athletes who are in the musical will
not be allowed to attend their practices or games from the Wednesday of the weekend before Spring Family
Weekend through the last performance on the Saturday of Family Weekend. The production schedule will
be communicated well in advance, and participants in the spring musical will be expected to attend to all of
their commitments–aside from athletics when they are not in the theater for rehearsals.
Dance
In the Fall and Winter, Dance is offered as an option, and rehearsals occur during the afternoon athletics
block. The Winter Dance offering culminates in a convocation performance in February.
Private Lessons
Students may pursue private instrumental lessons, which involve additional charges that can be billed directly
to a student’s account (for students on financial assistance, if your award covers the cost of private lessons,
they will not be charged to the student’s account, please contact the Director of Financial Assistance to
confirm if your financial assistance award applies to private lessons). The director of instrumental music can
help coordinate private instrumental lessons with outside professional teachers.
Co-Curricular Programs
CATE STUDENT HANDBOOK
25
< Table of Contents
Residential Life
Cate isn’t just a school – it’s a home away from home. Our boarding and day
school experience is tailored to provide unwavering support, genuine care,
and meaningful connections for every student.
The most notable part of boarding school is students living where they learn
and learning where they live. Each dorm at Cate has its own history, culture,
and spirit, which is why you’ll often hear students cheering loudly for their
fellow dorm mates and day students when it’s mentioned in assembly. For
advice, counsel, and fun activities, students can turn to prefects who make
up the senior leaders of the dorm. Also nearby are the faculty “dorm parents”
who are affiliated with a dorm and over see its residents. 98% of our faculty
live on campus – either in apartments attached to the dormitories or houses
around the grounds. That means students can get help with their homework,
some moral support, bake cookies, or watch their hometown team play an
important game with their Cate family – they’re always close by. In addition
to the aforementioned perks, day students can also find a “home away from
home” through our day buddy program. In addition to our dorm faculty on
duty in each dorm, our MOD (Monitor of the Day) is the daily point person
for students and families alike. They can be contacted 24 hours a day, seven
days a week when school is in session for any urgent or emergent needs. This
can include anything from a student missing the last shuttle back to Cate,
after hours student medical needs, a family’s last minute visit to The Mesa,
family emergencies, and more.
26
< Table of Contents
DORMITORIES, DORM LIFE & DORM FACILITIES
Dormitory life at Cate is based on trust and mutual respect for individual privacy and personal property. To
maintain this trust and the sense of community necessary for a positive residential experience, it is imperative
that each student understands and complies with the following basic school policy: No student is allowed in
another student’s room unless the room’s occupant is present with one and only one exception – day students
are allowed a ‘boarder buddy,’ and they can make that boarding student’s room ‘home base’ during the day.
Such arrangements are handled directly with the dorm head in advance.
Although the School subscribes to the philosophy that dormitory rooms should not have locked doors, every
room has a lockable space. Students are encouraged to use this area to store their valuables. While the School
takes reasonable precautions to secure dormitories and storage areas, Cate will not be responsible for items
taken from school buildings and/or dormitory rooms at any time during the year, including times when
School is not in session.
Dormitory heads are ultimately responsible for the discipline, standards, and conditions of their dormitories.
Dormitory rule violations are administered as outlined by the disciplinary system.
Community Guidelines for Residential Life in All Dormitories
• Residents will work together to create a trusting, respectful, and affirming environment in the dorm.
• Residents will respect the confidentiality of their peers’ personal information.
• Residents will respect each other’s space and physical privacy.
• Residents will wear clothing (top and bottom) or a bathrobe when in common spaces.
• Residents will consider the well-being of their fellow dorm-mates when navigating interpersonal
relationships and are expected to refrain from intimate behavior with other dorm residents
Cate School’s residential program houses students by grade and gender. New students are housed in first-year
dorms based on the gender identified during enrollment. Returning students have the opportunity to indicate
their preference for where they would like to live within dorms that align with the gender with which they
identify. Students are housed in male, female, or all-gender dorms.
All-gender housing is an additional residential option that does not enforce the gender binary and is open
to all returning students. All-gender housing at Cate is opt-in. All-gender housing will have the same
community spirit and resources as our single-gender housing options. We are committed to maintaining an
affirming and welcoming living environment free from discrimination based on gender and sexuality in all of
our dorms. Students can apply for placement in all-gender housing based on need, interest, availability, and
familial permission.
A note on gender: At Cate, one way we honor the dignity of each person within our community is by
recognizing and affirming each individual’s gender identity. To do this, we use gender-affirming language,
including pronouns identified by the individual, and support the use of facilities that align with one’s gender
identity. We welcome all students, including those whose gender is outside the gender binary, and utilize
Cate’s gender support plans (see page 74 for more information on gender support plans) to ensure that we
attend to the individual needs of each student.
Residential Life
< Table of Contents
Senior Responsibilities
All 12th-graders are assigned dormitory duties, such as monitoring study hours and daily assistance with the
completion of chores. 12th-graders have a reasonably wide latitude relative to 9th, 10th, and 11th-graders
regarding things like room inspection and how they use their discretionary time. However, just because
12th-graders do not have daily room inspections or formal study hours doesn’t mean that our expectations
for them are lessened. Just the opposite is true. Such senior privileges come with the heavy responsibility
of modeling good behavior and study habits for younger students. 12th-graders should keep their rooms
neat and clean, help maintain the sanctity of study hours (as well as study conditions during the academic
day), and observe regular and healthy sleep habits. Dorm heads may implement room inspections or modify
Senior privileges to provide additional support for a student.
Wellness Checks
Dorm Faculty will walk through the dorm and engage with students on a regular basis. They will
occasionally knock on the doors to check in with students.
Room Inspections & Dorm Chores
Students are responsible for the content, upkeep, and furnishings of their rooms and balconies, which must
be kept neat, clean, and free from fire hazards. Rooms are inspected by the dormitory faculty each academic
day and are always expected to remain presentable. ‘White glove’ inspection is a more thorough check,
which occurs in the days leading up to vacation breaks and Family Weekends. Dorm heads also have the
discretion of conducting ‘white glove’ at other points during the school year. Exact requirements are clarified
in advance, and specific expectations are posted in the dorms. Students will rotate through dorm chores to
take care of the dorm they live in together.
Additionally:
• Refrigerators must be visible in the room and may be inspected by dormitory faculty at any time.
• Students are expected to maintain the condition of their balcony as an extension of the room and
follow general dormitory policy.
• Any personal furniture kept on balconies must be kept neat and must not present a fire hazard or
interfere with the full swing of balcony doors.
• Electrical cords must not be under rugs or doors, hang on metal objects, or be placed in locations
where there is excessive water.
• You may not hang anything from the sprinklers/pipes.
• Excessive damage (i.e., anything beyond normal wear and tear) done during the school year will be
charged to the student’s account.
• Students may not have mechanisms to burn essential oils, candles, incense, combustible liquids, or
anything else that has an open flame in their dorm room at any time.
Searches
While the School wants students to feel that their rooms are theirs to use in some measure of privacy, the
School is obligated to ensure that the health and safety of all dormitory residents and their property is
protected. Therefore, the School reserves the right to search rooms, personal belongings, or persons if there
is reason to believe that illegal, prohibited, dangerous, or stolen articles are present.
Storage
The School has limited storage rooms for essential items, and students may store shipping boxes or those
items that they find little use for after they’ve settled into life at Cate. Storage areas are accessible before and
after each vacation, and access can be gained through the dorm head where the storage areas are located.
Laundry
Washers and dryers are available for the residents in certain dorms, and a large facility below Schoolhouse is
open for all boarders to use. These machines are available free of charge.
Residential Life
27
28
< Table of Contents
MOVING IN & PACKING
Because Cate’s dormitories have been constructed over 80 years, no two buildings are quite the same, and
even the rooms within a single dormitory may be different. Most single rooms are approximately 8x10 feet,
but, again, there are dorm-to-dorm variations. For a more detailed packing list, please refer to the “suggested
items to bring” list located in the New Enrollment tab on Veracross (for new students) under the Preparing to
Live at Cate column.
Standard room furnishings include:
• a desk, desk chair, bed frame, extra-long twin mattress (bedding is not provided), window treatments,
and a wastebasket and recycling bin;
• a bureau with four or five drawers – built-in some dorms and freestanding in others – and a closet
typically about 3–1/2 feet across.
• curtain rod supports are available and can be installed upon request.
Students may want to bring:
• a desk lamp, clothes hangers, a bathrobe, bulletin board, food containers, a combination lock, a fused
power strip/surge protector, and a hairdryer;
• blue painter’s tape and removable adhesive tape (like Command products) to hang pictures and wall art;
• a refrigerator no larger than 25’ H x 18’ D x 18’ W.
• Refrigerators may not be kept on balconies or in closets.
• There is a maximum of one refrigerator per room.
The School does not allow students to:
• make modifications to dormitory rooms (such as mounting a screen to the wall) or construct
loft-type beds;
• Use LED lights that stick directly to the wall (may use command strips or painter’s tape only);
• use furnishings for any purpose other than that for which they are intended;
• replace the school-provided desk, bed, or drawers;
• remove school-provided furnishings, closet doors, or balcony doors;
• place school furnishings on balconies or patios;
• enclose balconies with tapestries, flags, posters, or sunshades;
• keep anything with a heating element or significant electricity requirement in their dormitory rooms,
such but not limited to vaporizers, air conditioners (including portable ones), space heaters of any type,
hot plates, rice cookers, coffee pots, toaster ovens, and or microwaves;
• have a television (computer monitors larger than 25” are also not permitted);
• have pets of any kind.
Fire Regulation Requirements
The constant danger of fire requires the following dormitory policies that have been developed cooperatively
by the Carpinteria/Summerland Fire Department and the School. As such, the following guidelines are
required to be followed:
• County fire regulations prohibit space heaters and hangings on dormitory balconies – including sun
shades – and prohibit toaster ovens, kitchen appliances, irons, and other appliances with heating
elements.
• Electrical extension cords may not carry over 150 watts and must have a heavy-duty UL-approved cord
similar to those sold in the Blue Ewe. If more than one appliance is used on an extension cord, the cord
must be a fused multiple-plug extension cord, as sold in the Blue Ewe. Additionally, electrical cords must
not run under rugs or doors, hang on metal objects, or be placed in locations where there is excessive
water. The bed should be located so that it does not come in contact with an electrical outlet.
Residential Life
< Table of Contents
• Furniture or carpets should be placed in a room so as not to interfere with the door swing.
Carpets that interfere with the door must be cut to allow free swing.
• Individual decoration may not cover more than eight square feet. Tapestries must be commercially
fireproofed and may not be hung on ceilings or balconies. Such items must bear a tag identifying them
as fireproofed, or students must show a receipt for the fireproofing. Paper lampshades are not allowed.
• Fireplaces located in some of the dormitory rooms may not be used.
• Students should immediately report the continuous sound of a smoke detector to the dorm head or
the MOD. Report malfunctioning (beeping) detectors to the dorm head. Batteries are not to be
removed from smoke detectors.
• Placing any item(s) on the top of or hanging from a sprinkler system is prohibited by state and
local fire regulations.
• Students must not tamper with fire extinguishers. A minimum fine may be assessed, along with
disciplinary action, each time a fire extinguisher is needlessly discharged.
STUDENT VISITATION, BOUNDARIES, & SLEEPOVERS/
ON-CAMPUS OVERNIGHTS
Spending time together is an important part of any healthy relationship and an essential aspect of Cate’s
residential program. We encourage students to visit each other, to foster friendships, and to develop the
skills that lead to meaningful relationships. Visitation rules are in place to create a safe environment for
all students. All visitors to dorm rooms must be hosted by a resident of the dorm, and guests are expected
to observe dorm rules. We place a certain degree of trust in all of our students that they will abide by our
community expectations. Any failure to respect the spirit and letter of these guidelines may result in loss of
privileges and/or disciplinary action.
Residents are expected to consider the well-being of their fellow dorm mates when navigating interpersonal
relationships, especially when having visitors. Dorm visitation is intended for social interaction between
students, not for sexual intimacy. Residents are the champions of their living space and are encouraged to
hold one another accountable to community expectations with care and support for each other’s well-being.
All residents and guests should expect regular wellness checks from faculty and student residential leaders to
ensure the safety and well-being of all individuals occupying residential spaces.
Visitation during the academic day and study hours:
• 10th, 11th, & 12th grades may visit students of OTHER dorms of their same gender during the
academic day and study hours. (Bothin to SH, CHE to 25H prefects, etc.)
• 9th grade may visit students of OTHER dorms of their same gender outside the academic day and
outside study hours (only exception during study hours when they’re engaged in group study with
permission from dorm faculty on duty)
• CHLL - Students from outside the dorm could visit CHLL at any time based on the above grade-based
guidelines (i.e., a 10th-grader may visit during the academic day, a 9th-grader may visit outside of the
academic day and study hours)
• CHLL residents can visit other dorms based on their gender identity.
• Day Students will be encouraged to affiliate with a dorm (day/boarder buddy) and are welcome to visit
residents within their affiliated dorm in their rooms, including during the academic day.
Residential Life
29
30
< Table of Contents
Common Space Visitation
Common rooms function as drop-in spaces for study during the academic day and for visiting, pop-up study
circles, movie screenings, etc., at any other time. As such, dormitory common rooms are open to visitors of
any gender. However, visiting hours may vary by dorm based on the common room location. Visitors to
common rooms are not required to be invited or accompanied from 7 AM until in-dorm.
Common spaces include:
'25 House common room, Bothin common room, CHE common room, CHE lower hall gathering space,
CHW common room, HH landing, Lido common room (formerly apartment), Long House common room,
Savage common room, SH common room, and SH Landing.
Interdorm (non-resident) Visitation
Interdorm visiting involves non-residents visiting individual resident rooms within a given dorm.
Non-resident visitation within personal rooms will commence after each dorm has had the opportunity
to set community expectations and norms; for upper school students, that is typically after Outings Week,
and for lower school students, it is after Fall Family Weekend.
Once interdorm visitation commences, the following guidelines will apply to all students:
Schedule:
• Tuesday-Thursday, N+, and “S” Fridays: 6:00 - 7:45 PM
• N-Fridays: 6:00 - 10:00 PM
• Saturday: 4:00 - 6:00 PM and 8:00 - 10:00 PM
• Sunday: 4:00 - 6:00 PM
Interdorm expectations:
• Guest and host must check in with the faculty on duty for permission before entering the host’s room.
• If the dorm faculty is not in the dorm, please text the person on duty. You may not start interdorm until
the adult acknowledges the text.
• The dorm faculty will be in the dorm as soon as possible.
• The guest can only go into the room of their host (must ask for permission to go into another
person’s room).
• Doors need to remain open.
• A resident can host more than one interdorm visitor at a time.
• When visiting or hosting visitors, students should be aware and considerate of others with respect
to noise, traffic, culture, and school expectations.
Boundaries
Except during interdorm visitation hours, dorm hallways are off-limits to all members of a different gender
except with special permission from a gender support plan or arrangements made for students living in the allgender dorm. Students may gather on open patios following the guidelines mentioned in the previous section
on ‘visitation.’ If there is a railing, you may not cross it or sit on it (i.e., on the Parsonage lawn side, CHE
mountain side, etc.).
Residential Life
< Table of Contents
Students may leave their dormitory after 6:00 AM but may not visit another dormitory until after 7:00 AM.
In addition, after sundown or 7:00 PM (whichever comes first) on all nights of the week, student activity is
restricted to inside the area bounded by the road enclosing Long House, the Chapel, Savage Dormitory, the
Hitchcock Theatre, and '25 House. Cook House dormitories, the Sprague Gymnasium, and faculty homes
are the only exceptions to this boundary. Students visiting any locations beyond boundaries after sundown,
such as faculty homes, or Sprague Gym, must inform the MOD of when and where they are going and when
they return. Students may not leave the dormitory after the evening in-dorm check-in.
Sleepovers/On-campus overnights
Overnights are a senior privilege beginning after Fall Family Weekend. They can occur on N-Fridays and
Saturdays. The request must be submitted on Reach and parent/guardian permission must be obtained via
Reach by 9 pm. Parental permission is required under the following circumstances: if the student is a day
student and/or if the student is requesting a sleep-over in the all-gender dorm.
Community overnights will be organized throughout the year, particularly on the night of community
events as part of the school activities calendar (i.e., prior to Outings Week, after homecoming or prom).
Community overnights will be organized as formal activities and will be hosted either in dorm common
rooms or larger areas such as the barns, gym, etc., depending on the event.
Off-Campus Visitors
Visitors who are not immediate family members must be introduced to the dean of students or MOD
upon arrival on campus. All visitors must adhere to the following visitation guidelines. All visitors attending
weekend school activities must be pre-approved by the dean of students.
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
Safety is a top priority for Cate. The School has developed a comprehensive plan for responding to a wide
range of emergencies, and students receive instruction and practice safety protocols using scheduled drills
throughout the year. In case of evacuation, we have a primary evacuation location and a secondary evacuation
location. If the need for evacuation arises, the School has protocols for moving students off campus and
housing them locally or helping them get home, depending on the circumstances. In an actual emergency,
families will be contacted by the School with regular updates via email, text, or both, using Titan HST, the
school’s emergency mass communication platform.
Electric Power Failure
If the power fails during the day, a typical school routine will be observed; if the power fails at night, students
should return to their dorms and await further instructions from their dorm parents. We have areas located
on campus with backup generators in the event of power failure.
Fire
A fire is signaled by the continuous sound of the siren located on the roof of Schoolhouse. A continuous
ringing of the fire bells in each building can be heard. In addition, the sprinkler system in the building with
the fire will be activated, and the fire department will automatically respond. In the event of an accidental
alarm, contact the MOD at 805-698-4808 or Emergency Facilities at 805-698-8604. All students and
dormitory faculty should report to the following locations:
Residential Life
31
32
< Table of Contents
Dorm Fire Alarm Report Locations
• '25 House on lower Bothin lawn, between Bothin and '25 House
• Long House on Chapel lawn at the end of High House/Lido
• Cook House West on Chapel Circle at the entrance to the Chapel
• Cook House East on the lawn below Chapel, adjacent to the road
• High House/Lido on Senior Lawn in front of High House/Lido
• Savage on the lawn in front of Savage
• Schoolhouse on Senior Lawn outside the College Counseling Office
• Bothin/Parsonage on the bricks located up the stairs from Bothin at the end of the Day Walkway
• Day Male-Identifying Students report with Cook House West on the Chapel circle
• Day Female-Identifying students report with Schoolhouse on Senior Lawn outside the College
Counseling Office
• Day Non-Binary students report with Cook House East on the lawn below the Chapel,
adjacent to the road
• In a fire, dorm faculty in each dorm take attendance and report to the MOD in the McBean Library.
Students and all employees remain at the designated check-in locations until released by an ALL CLEAR
notification sent via Titan HST. Through recklessness or ill-intention, any student who triggers a false
alarm can be charged for all costs resulting from the alarm.
Earthquake
If an earthquake occurs indoors, students should remain indoors and get under a desk, table, or doorway,
but stay clear of windows. If outside, students should move into an open area and stay away from buildings,
trees, and power lines. After the quake subsides, students should report to their secondary location (tennis
courts) for attendance checks. The Incident Commander will communicate further instructions via the
Titan HST app.
Cate School offers rich opportunities for day students in leadership, athletics,
and creativity, emphasizing the values of our mission statement -scholarship,
companionship, service, and commitment. Our schedule is built around a
residential program where we prioritize student engagement during weekdays,
evenings, and weekends. Here are some highlights and important notes for
Residential Life
CATE STUDENT HANDBOOK
33
< Table of Contents
Day Student Life
being a day student.
DAY STUDENTS WITHIN RESIDENTIAL LIFE
Cate School aims to incorporate all students into community life. As such, our day students are
welcome to participate in as much of Cate life outside of their commitments as they desire. Eating
meals in the dining hall, going into town on the Cate shuttle with friends, participating in weekend
activities, immersing in dorm life as a day buddy, and spending the night on designated overnights are all
encouraged. 
34
< Table of ContentsDay Student Life
Day Student Facilities and Dorm Use
All day students are welcome to store their belongings, hang out, and take showers in our day student
lounge located in Fleischman Gym. The Fleischman Gym day student locker rooms can also store changes of
clothing. We recommend a lock if using the lockers, as the School is not responsible for any lost or missing
personal items. Further, day students are welcome to designated parts of the McBean Library for a place of
study during the academic day.
Day students are welcome at any dorm meeting or event for the dorm to which they are affiliated. All 9th and
new 10th-grade day students are affiliated with corresponding dormitories (female-identifying students with
'25 House; male-identifying students with Long House) in an effort to experience a strong dorm community
connection from the start. Returning 10th-, 11th- and 12th-grade day students are encouraged to establish a
boarding buddy whose room they may access during the school day as a day buddy.
Evenings as a Day Student
We encourage day students to stay on campus after sports block and into the evening. This allows students
to share meals together, foster friendships outside the classroom and sports, and study together. Many of our
student-run activities meet on weeknights throughout the year, including clubs, affinity groups, and senate,
as well as various student leadership meetings. Peer Learning Labs are available in the evenings from 9:00 to
10:00 PM. Study hours are held from 8:00 to 10:00 PM for 9th, 10th, and 11th-graders. Day students who
remain on campus are expected to abide by study hour rules according to their grades.
Day students are expected to sign on and off the Mesa on Reach so the School can maintain accurate
attendance outside the academic day and sports block. It is imperative that we know who is on campus at
any point in time in case of emergency. As such, day students may not arrive at school before 6:00 AM and
must depart at the same in-dorm time as their corresponding grades (see table below). It is up to each student
and their family to best determine how much time a day student spends on campus beyond mandatory
commitments and how late a student may remain on campus.
9th grade 10th grade 11th grade 12th grade
May arrive
on Campus 6:00 AM 6:00 AM 6:00 AM 6:00 AM
Must depart
Campus by
School night:
10:00 PM
Weekend:
11:30 PM
School night:
10:00 PM
Weekend:
11:30 PM
School night:
10:00 PM
Weekend:
11:30 PM
School night:
11:00 PM
Weekend:
11:30 PM
Overnights
Only on approved
nights* with parent
permission
Only on approved
nights* with parent
permission
Only on approved
nights* with parent
permission
Any weekend with
parent permission
and dorm faculty
approval
*typically before or after a school event
SCHOOL COMMITMENTS
Attendance
Attendance and community engagement are of utmost importance for all students. This pertains to classes
and sports as well as all-school commitments like convocation, seated meals, and Saturday classes. Often, 
< Table of Contents
the first commitment of the day is a community chore to be completed before the academic day begins and
should be planned for accordingly.
Requesting to Miss Commitments
Day families should arrange appointments and other personal events outside the academic day (8:30 AM -
3:00 PM) and around all-school commitments whenever possible. Day students who will miss a commitment
for a personal commitment must submit a “Special Permission” in Reach, or for any health-related
appointments, please call or email the Ellis House. See the section titled Medical Services for more details.
Day of Missed Commitments & Illness
To be excused for illness and medical appointments, please notify the Ellis House at 805-684-2807 before
8:00 AM on the day of the illness. Day students who have missed class due to illness may not return to the
Mesa that day or evening for athletics or other events without specific permission from the Ellis House.
Please see the Cate Academic Support Services section for more information on support after illnesses.
To be excused for non-medical related issues, please contact the MOD phone at 805-698-4808 before
8:00 AM the day of to communicate the reason for the student’s absence.
Parents must update the Ellis House on medical conditions that might impact their child’s academic or
athletic performance, including but not limited to injury, illness, or any changes in medication. See the
section on medical services for more information.
TRANSPORTATION & DRIVING
Day students may drive themselves to school once they obtain their driver’s license. All students must abide
by any relevant California license restrictions. In order to maintain driving permission on campus, it is
essential for day student drivers to adhere to on-campus speed limits, safety signs, and driving expectations.
All violations should expect a disciplinary response from the dean of students.
Parking & Drop-off
Parking is available in any paved location between Sprague Gymnasium and '25 House, which is not reserved
for residents or medical staff. Please do not park in any other locations unless directed to do so by the School.
Students may use the charging stations while actively charging their vehicles.
Day students who do not yet drive themselves to campus are typically dropped off and picked up by their
parents/guardians at the crest of the hill (Pizza Lawn).
Driving Other Students
Day student 12th-graders may drive other boarding or day 12th-graders if all students involved have parent/
guardian permission from the Student Services Office. Non-12th-grade students are not permitted to drive
boarding students at any time unless given special permission approved by the Dean of Students Office. Day
students are permitted to carpool to and from school only with the driver’s and rider’s parental permission.
Non-12th-grade day students must get permission from the Dean of Students Office to leave campus unless
they are leaving campus for the day.
Driving During the Academic Day
Only 12th grade students may leave campus during the academic day or sports block and only if they will
not miss any commitments. Any student leaving campus during this time must sign out (SISO) to
Carpinteria via Reach or submit a leave request for any destination other than Carpinteria.
Day Student Life
35
36
< Table of Contents
Non-12th-grade students may not leave campus during the academic day or sports block unless leaving
for special permission, an appointment, or due to illness, all of which must be approved by following the
guidance in the earlier aforementioned sections.
EMERGENCIES & EVACUATIONS
All students must provide the Student Services Office with their cell phone numbers at the beginning of
each school year and update them if the number changes.
In the event of an evacuation due to a fire alarm or other emergency, day students will gather in the
following areas:
• Day Male-Identifying students report with Cook House West on the Chapel circle
• Day Female-Identifying students report with Schoolhouse on Senior Lawn outside the College
Counseling Office
• Day Non-Binary students report with Cook House East/Cook House Lower Level on the lawn below
the Chapel, adjacent to the road.
Dorm faculty at these locations will take attendance, and students will remain together until they receive
the all-clear signal. For more information on emergency procedures, see the Emergencies Section later in
the handbook.
The services provided to students include Health Services, Counseling
Services, Athletic Training Services, and Academic Support Services. Support
is offered to all students, and when needed, a higher level of support is
available. The Student Services Committee is directed by the Assistant Head
Day Student Life
CATE STUDENT HANDBOOK
37
< Table of Contents
Student
Services
for Students.
Supports are tiered depending on student needs. Tier 1 supports are available
to all students and include assistance from advisors, residential life, inclusive
instruction, human development, peer tutors, teaching assistants, and
prefects. Tier 2 supports are available to students who have been identified
as needing additional support. These include supervised study hall, learning
labs, and limited services from counseling and the academic skills office. Tier
3 support is for a very few students who need wrap-around care to support
their needs; this involves support from the Student Services Committee and,
when needed, the implementation of a Student Support Plan.
Students, parents, faculty, advisors, dorm parents, and administrators are
encouraged to complete the Cate Wellness Referral Form should they have
a concern about themselves or another member of the community.
WELLNESS SERVICES
The Ellis House, the Mesa Clinic, and the Athletic Training Center comprise the Health and Wellness
services at Cate; the role of our program is to assess and coordinate the physical and mental health care
for all of our students. This includes triaging emergent and urgent medical and mental health issues,
dispensing daily medication, supporting stable chronic physical and psychosocial issues, providing 
38
< Table of Contents
limited treatment for minor illnesses, and coordinating specialized care with outside providers. Striving to
educate and promote the active involvement of all students in the healthcare process, the Health and Wellness
program staff seeks to instill in each student a sense of responsibility for the maintenance of personal health.
The Counseling and Health Services Departments are located in Ellis House, and it is staffed by our medical
assistants, registered nurses, licensed clinical therapists, and school physician. The Ellis House offers a place
for students to seek medical or mental health services and includes 6 ambulatory beds, three counseling
rooms, a private space for Zoom appointments, and a quiet space to rest. The Mesa Clinic includes our
CLIA-certified laboratory and seven individual isolation beds. The Athletic Training Center is staffed by
three board-certified, full-time athletic trainers who specialize in preventing, recognizing, managing, and
rehabilitating injuries, including concussions.
There is no charge for overnight stays or an evaluation by the School Physician, School Nurse, Counselor, or
Athletic Trainers. Students are encouraged to come to the Ellis House or Athletic Training Center anytime
they are ill, injured, or simply concerned.
The Health and Wellness program relies on good communication with parents, students, student’s private
clinicians, physicians, Cate’s counseling services, athletic services, and faculty. All student health information
is protected under HIPAA and FERPA. In the event that a Cate student requires urgent or emergent care, the
Health and Wellness programs may share your student’s health records with advisors or dorm parents with
your permission and, when needed, will act as the in loco parentis.
MEDICAL SERVICES
Hours of Operation
Monday – Friday 7:30 AM - 7:30 PM
Saturday 7:30 AM - 12:30 PM
Sunday 7:30 AM - 12:30 PM
After hours, emergencies or sudden illness should be reported immediately by a student to the dormitory
faculty or the MOD (805-698-4808) for referral to the nurse. An on-call nurse is available 24 hours a day.
Services
The Health Services in the Ellis House provides 24-hour health service to the Cate student community.
Services include providing daily medication, evaluating and triaging acutely ill or injured students, caring
for ill students overnight, and providing transportation to specialist appointments. Regular access to the
School’s physician for on-campus consultation, treatment, and/or referral for acute and emergency illness or
injury is available.
For illness/injury requiring services beyond the scope of practice of the Ellis House, the student will be
referred to a local urgent care, specialist, or emergency room. The student’s personal insurance will be billed
for these services, and any co-pays or other health-related charges not covered by insurance will be billed to
the student’s account by Cate. The Ellis House is unable to bill health insurance directly. If Health Services
determines that further medical evaluation is not emergent or urgent, referrals to local physician specialists
will be given to the parents to arrange outpatient workups. This allows families to find a physician that is
within their insurance network.
Missed Commitments Due to Illness
If a boarding student is going to miss class due to illness, they must check in at the Ellis House.
If a Day student is going to miss class:
• Day parents are asked to call the Ellis House before 8:00 AM (805-684-2807) anytime a student
Student Services
< Table of ContentsStudent Services
will miss classes or other commitments due to illness,
• Call daily when a student is out for any length of time
• Notify the Ellis House when the student returns to campus.
Academic Support during Illness:
During a student’s illness, the Ellis House will help coordinate with the Cate Academic Support Services to
provide support to the student. Depending on the circumstances, the student can follow class assignments
on Schoology independently and or/ may choose to listen to class remotely. If a student misses more than
five days of school, an academic work plan will be provided by our Cate Academic Support Services. All
students who are away from school due to illness may use the Afternoon Study Hall to make up work when
they return. Day Students who miss more than three school days require a health care provider note before
returning to classes. It’s the student’s responsibility to contact their teachers to determine what work was
missed.
Required Healthcare Forms
The Health Services team uses Magnus Health Systems for electronic health records and electronic
communication with parents regarding health-related information. Parents will receive information regarding
Magnus Health during our annual enrollment/re-enrollment process. Most of the required forms can be
completed online; however, there are several forms (including the physical exam form) that must be completed
by a healthcare provider and scanned into Magnus Health. All questions regarding required health forms
should be directed to the Director of Nursing. If using a private physician’s health form rather than the Magnus
form, it is the parent’s responsibility to make sure all information requested on our Magnus form is present.
The School’s medical and activity permission forms serve students, parents, and the School in two important
ways. First and foremost, the forms provide health information to those who work with students so that each
student receives the best care possible. Second, these forms provide parents with information about areas
of normal School life in which there are inherent risks. The deadline for completed forms is July 15. Those
students arriving on campus in the Fall without forms will not be able to participate in school until forms are
completed. We understand that the physical exam form from your physician may be delayed due to difficulty
getting appointments. If you are unable to get this completed by July 15, please notify the Health Services team
with the date of your scheduled appointment. All other forms must be received and approved by the deadline.
Health Insurance
All students are required to have proof of valid health insurance on file in their Magnus Health Systems chart.
A copy of the student’s current health insurance card (front and back) must be uploaded to the student’s
health record on Magnus Health. The policyholder’s name and date of birth are also required,
as well as the expiration date.
If a student is covered by an HMO or state-issued insurance (i.e., Medi-Cal), the parent must contact their
health insurance provider and change to a provider in the Santa Barbara area; please note such changes on
the health care forms. If a parent is unable to change to a provider in this area, they will need to arrange for
a policy for this area. Parents can contact the business office at 805-684-4127, ext. 208, to inquire about the
possibility of acquiring a health insurance policy that can be used locally.
International students must have a health insurance policy that is valid for use in the United States.
Policies will not be accepted if written in a language other than English. Several companies offer health
insurance applicable in the United States for international students.
Outside Health Care Providers and Medical Appointments
Cate students may be seen by a clinic or private physician, and the School will provide transportation into
Carpinteria or Santa Barbara for urgent medical and dental appointments. A small fee ($30 round trip)
will be billed to the student’s account. If a parent needs the name of a local medical care provider, please
contact the Ellis House for referrals. It is best, however, if the Health staff schedule appointments for
39
40
< Table of Contents
boarding students. This allows the nurses to help students learn to manage both their time and their health.
Additionally, this allows the nurse to coordinate the needs of all students requiring transportation to and
from medical and dental appointments.
To ensure the best health care for Cate students, it is essential that the Ellis House be notified of all medical
and/or dental appointments that are made by a student or for a student by parents (including day students).
Communication in this regard helps to ensure that proper notifications for missed School commitments are
arranged, and it allows School nurses to follow up on any medical orders or care plans. To help manage this
process, all students (including day students) are required to sign out and back in through the Ellis House
when they have medical appointments. It is expected that all routine medical and dental appointments
(i.e., annual physicals, yearly eye exams, dental cleanings, etc.) will be scheduled over vacations when your
child is home in order to mitigate missed school commitments.
In addition, it is important for parents (including day parents) to keep the Ellis House up to date on all
medical conditions that may have an impact on the child’s performance or condition at Cate. Updates
include additions to or changes in medication, new diagnoses, or changes in medical plans.
Students must have their insurance coverage information for all appointments and pharmacy prescriptions.
All charges incurred for health care services by agencies other than the Ellis House are the responsibility
of the student’s parents or legal guardians. Requests for payment will be sent directly from the health care
provider to the parents or to the insurance company designated by you. Other than charges from Albertsons
Pharmacy and supplies/medications provided to students from the Health Center stock, student accounts will
not be charged for outside provider services.
Medications
If a student requires new or ongoing medications, the prescription will be sent to Albertsons Pharmacy
(805-684-8367) in Carpinteria and charged to the student’s family insurance. Co-pays are charged to
student accounts. It is imperative that the Director of Nursing or Medical Director be made aware of any
student receiving a prescription for medication. This information will be kept confidential, except when it
becomes necessary for a student to be seen by other health care professionals, at which time this information
will be made available to the attending provider. Such information may also be disclosed in connection
with the administrative or disciplinary needs of the School. Student medication information is kept in
Magnus Health.
All prescription medications are administered directly by the Ellis Center staff and must be prescribed by a
licensed practitioner (non-parent). Such medications include, but are not limited to, stimulants, pain control,
antibiotics, anti-anxiety medications, and antidepressants. Prescription medications that are allowed in the
dorms include but are not limited to the following: antibiotics, acne medications, some allergy medications,
asthma medications, birth control pills, epi-pens, and insulin.
Controlled substances may only be kept at the Ellis House and are not permitted on campus in any area. Any
student found in possession of such medication may be considered in violation of the honor code. Students
who are in doubt about whether a prescription drug is a controlled medication should consult the Director of
Nursing, the medical director, or their primary physician. Controlled substances require the nurse to dispense
the medication. Students are not allowed to have weekend or evening packets of controlled substances.
Over-the-counter medications are dispensed by the School nurse per the School physician’s standing orders.
Please do not send your student to school with any OTC medications as the Ellis House will provide this
type of medication. Herbal, vitamin, mineral, and other supplements may be kept in dorms only after having
been reviewed by the School’s physician and deemed safe. If such is the case, the container will be “initiated”
as approved for use by an Ellis House staff member. Supplements will also be documented in student medical
Student Services
41
< Table of Contents
records.
Prescription medication that is required after Ellis House hours is given by the MOD under the advice of the
School nurse. Over-the-counter medication that is required after health and wellness center hours is given by
the dorm parent under the advice of the School nurse.
In order for the student to receive prescription medication, the prescribing physician must complete a
Physician Order For Medication Administration form. This form can be printed from the Magnus Health
requirement library. Upon completion by the student’s doctor, the completed form can be submitted directly
to Magnus Health via fax, mail, or scan.
After the start of the school year, any changes to the medication require that a new physician order form be
completed and submitted to the Ellis House.
Upon arrival to campus, the student must first stop by the health center and check his/her medication in with
the nurse on duty. The medication will then be verified with the physician’s order and either authorized to be
kept in the dorms or delegated for nurse administration.
Refills can be facilitated through the Ellis House. Please email those requests to health_center@cate.org, and a
nurse will assist you.
The Ellis House will not accept medication in any language other than English.
The medication must come in the original packaging.
With regards to students traveling home on break, those medications that are not approved for the dorm
will be sent home with the student under the strict understanding that the student will give their medication
directly to the parent. An email notification via Magnus will alert the parent, communicating the prescribed
name of the medication, dose, route, time, and quantity given to the student at the time of packaging. The
administration of the medication will be the sole responsibility of the parent. Controlled substances will be
mailed directly to the parent; however, they will only be sent to the State
of California.
Sharing, selling, or stealing another’s medication is considered an honor code violation that will result in the
convening of the Discipline Committee.
Parental Notification of Health Services
Parents are notified if a student
• requires urgent care or emergency medical services for any reason
• spends the night in the Mesa Clinic
• sustains an injury that requires the services of an outside healthcare provider
• requires an appointment with a medical or dental specialist
• requires a prescribed medication
• requires an appointment with the School’s physician
• requires diagnostic imaging or labs
Confidentiality
The nurse and/or School’s physician will contact the family regarding health concerns, and students are
encouraged to communicate with their families. Parents who have concerns regarding a student’s health are
encouraged to call the Ellis House at any time.
Student Services
42
< Table of Contents
Parents are informed of and have access to information concerning their minor children’s health unless, as
in reproductive decisions, the treating healthcare professional is prohibited by California law from divulging
such information without the individual’s permission. Detailed information concerning an individual’s health
status is restricted to other professionals on a need-to-know basis. This confidentiality facilitates a foundation
of trust, which promotes the honest, uncensored communication necessary for effective health care.
There are times when a student may feel unable to discuss sensitive issues with their family. These times might
include issues of sexuality, birth control, pregnancy, and sexually transmitted infections. To provide timely
information and treatment, the student’s request for confidentiality will be respected.
According to California State law, a student may receive counseling and a prescription for birth control
without parental consent. However, every effort will be made to encourage students to understand their
parents’ concern for them, and support and assistance will be offered in developing the ability to discuss
sensitive issues with parents.
To ensure the safety and health of students, appropriate faculty members, including dorm parents and
advisors, may be notified of acute or pre-existing health conditions that prevent a student from full
participation in the life of the community. We ask for parental consent to share this information in the
Magnus portal. The requirement is labeled as “Health Center Communication with Advisor, Dorm Head,
and Director of Academic Services Permission,” and with your consent, it allows the Health and Wellness
services to communicate pertinent and limited information with my student’s designated advisor, Dorm
Head, and the Director of Academic Services.
COUNSELING SERVICES
Cate’s counseling program functions to understand that all of us – especially young people – are constantly
changing and growing. Thus, our counseling services are designed to help students realize their potential and
develop the courage and integrity to address personal, interpersonal, and ethical questions confidently.
Personal counseling and referrals are available to students both on and off campus. A student may request an
appointment with the director of counseling services directly or through their advisor or the Ellis House staff.
Counseling sessions with the director of counseling are intended to be short-term (eight sessions per student).
Longer-term counseling support is available through a referral to a licensed therapist in Santa Barbara at the
cost of the family, which the director of counseling can provide. Students are encouraged to seek counseling
services if they have personal concerns, are having difficulty in some area of their lives, or if they are worried
about a friend or family member.
Students who have been referred for counseling have the right to know the nature and origin of that referral.
They are asked to meet once with the counselor to discuss the nature of the referral and the potential benefits
of counseling. Subsequent appointments are voluntary. Under some circumstances, the School may require
counseling with the School’s counselor or a local mental health provider. In such situations, sessions are
discontinued only with the consent of the School and the counselor. If you would like your child to meet
with a private therapist outside the School, please contact the School counselor, who will be happy to make
referrals and help with any necessary arrangements.
Counseling Guidelines
• Confidentiality: Unless it involves information that relates to the endangerment of the individual,
another person, or the community at large, all communications with the counseling office are kept
between the student and counseling/health services. Parental involvement is welcome, but parents are
asked to respect this confidentiality.
Student Services
43
< Table of Contents
• Cases of emotional, physical, or sexual abuse must, by law, be reported to Child Protective Services or
law enforcement.
• Students are responsible for meeting all scheduled appointments and should contact the Counseling
Services Office in advance when unable to make an appointment. Missed appointments will be
rescheduled at the student’s request.
• Ongoing student meetings with outside therapists require parental permission. Payment will be arranged
directly with the therapist and the student’s parents.
• Emergency consultation or hospitalization to ensure the safety of a student is authorized by the parental
medical release form. In the case of a personal crisis of this nature, parents are notified immediately.
Parents will likely be asked to come to campus as soon as is reasonably possible.
• Students are routinely encouraged to identify and use all of the adult support available to them, especially
their parents, but parents will not be notified of a referral or routine counseling unless there is a serious
concern about a student’s immediate or ongoing well-being.
ATHLETIC TRAINING CENTER & SPORTS MEDICINE
Cate School employs board-certified athletic trainers (ATs) with the goal of allowing easy access to sports
medicine services for all students. Athletic trainers are healthcare professionals who specialize in preventing,
recognizing, managing, and rehabilitating injuries. At Cate, the athletic trainers coordinate the sports
medicine program. Working under the direction of the School Medical Director, they serve as liaisons
between the Ellis House, outside physicians and specialists, coaches, parents, and advisors. The ATs at Cate
are highly qualified in the field of sports medicine and are certified by the Board of Certification – the
governing body for athletic training in the United States.
Musculoskeletal Injury
When a student sustains an injury, the ATs evaluate and develop a plan of care to manage the injury. This
plan may include treatment provided by the ATs or a referral to an outside source. Referrals may occur at any
given point throughout an injury (including emergency situations). Appointments with an outside provider
is available as needed (at the discretion of the AT or School physician). Parents/ guardians will be notified
regarding student injuries and updated throughout the course of the injury via Healthy Roster. Information
on how to set up an account is available on the Magnus Health Portal, and your account can be accessed
via the Healthy Roster app or website. If a student sees a doctor not affiliated with the School, the family
will be responsible for providing documentation stating the injury, plan of care, and, when the time comes,
clearance to return to activity. The doctor may use the school-provided document, which is also available on
the resources tab on Healthy Roster. The student will not be permitted to return to activities until proper
documentation is received. Documentation will be accepted from any non-parent doctor (M.D. or D.O.),
physical therapist, or athletic trainer.
Athletic trainers are available in the Brittingham Family Training Center (ATC) for evaluations, therapeutic
exercises, and treatment throughout the day (9:00 AM–3:00 PM) and, in special cases, during the sports
period. Evaluations are provided during the academic day by appointment and, in special cases, after the
sports period. If the injury occurs during sports or competition, the AT will perform an initial evaluation on
the field to determine the extent of the injury. On Saturdays, an AT will be available at least one (1) hour
before competitions or scheduled practices. If there are no competitions or scheduled practices, an AT will be
in the athletic training center (ATC) on Saturdays. The ATC is closed on Sundays.
Head Injury
When students sustain head injuries, they are evaluated by an AT, and if an AT is unavailable, a school nurse
will perform the initial assessment to determine the extent of the injury and then refer the student to an AT.
Each student will have a baseline test through c3logix – a neurocognitive testing program – upon arrival at
Cate and again in their 11th-grade year. If a family declines a c3logix test, the student will have a SCAT5
Student Services
44
< Table of Contents
(Sport Concussion Assessment Tool) completed and saved to their file. In some circumstances, a student may
be referred to the emergency department or the School physician, depending on the mechanism or severity of
symptoms. Thereafter, the student is monitored through the c3logix program. In addition, Cate’s Concussion
Stages program is applied to limit cognitive and physical stressors via our Return-to-Learn and Returnto-Play protocols (also in accordance with the California Interscholastic Federation). This program allows
parents, teachers, dorm faculty, the health care team, and the student in question to work in concert with one
another. Please see Cate’s concussion policy in Healthy Roster.
STUDENT SERVICES COMMITTEE (SSC)
The SSC is composed of faculty and administrators whose purpose is to provide wrap-around care for
students who may need a higher level of support. Chaired by the Assistant Head for Students, the committee
is composed of the medical director, dean of students, assistant head for students, dean of studies, director of
nursing, director of counseling services, director of CASS (academic support services), director of diversity,
equity and inclusion, and director of residential life. The committee serves as a forum to address individual
student concerns and create and implement Student Support Plans to address the physical/mental health,
academic support, and mentoring for these students.
Four Trimester Policy
Occasionally, for a variety of reasons, our students struggle in ways that exceed the normal adjustment of
managing Cate’s rigorous and challenging program. As a School, we are committed to providing support
systems–physical/mental health, academic support, and mentoring–in order to help in an area(s) where a
student is struggling.
In these circumstances, the Student Services Committee, in concert with the student, advisor, and family,
develops a Student Support Plan (SSP) as soon as we know that a student is struggling. The intention of
the SSP is to identify the challenge and create a support plan that is individualized and focused on helping
a student find greater success toward thriving at Cate. Occasionally, even with the support plans in place, a
student continues to struggle. In these circumstances, we begin conversations with the student, advisor, and
family that establish a check-in point at the end of the fourth trimester of a student’s experience at Cate as the
moment where we will determine whether or not our support systems and the student’s natural maturation
and growth will be enough to make Cate a place where the student can thrive. Our goal is simply to identify
whether a student will thrive at Cate or if the student’s needs would be better suited to a different learning
environment. Having these conversations at the end of the fourth trimester of a student’s experience is
purposefully focused on a time frame that allows a family to pursue other opportunities if we arrive at the
decision that a different learning environment would serve the student better. Policy updated June 2024
MEDICAL LEAVE OR WITHDRAWAL
If a medical condition arises that impacts a student’s ability to participate fully in Cate’s program or
significantly impacts the Cate community and cannot be adequately addressed and treated within the Cate
community, the family may request or the School may require a student to take a medical leave of absence or
to withdraw from the School. Please see the Leave of Absence Policy for more information.
As a small residential community, the college counseling team gets to know
students through natural interactions and shared experiences on the Mesa
and on trips and outings. The team works with faculty to help students
choose classes and plan an appropriate standardized testing schedule. Timely
Student Services
CATE STUDENT HANDBOOK
45
< Table of Contents
College
Counseling
programming and one-on-one meetings during the 10th-grade year ready
students to begin working formally with an assigned college counselor at
the start of 11th grade. For detailed information about the Cate College
Counseling program, please read College Counseling resources, available on
the parent portal at portals.veracross.com/ cate. In the 11th grade, counselors
encourage students to reflect on their own interests, talents, and goals and
then to research and explore the colleges that will foster those abilities and
aspirate and guidance is provided through one-on-one meetings with students
during this self-evaluation and research part of the process. In addition, regular
college counseling classes provide 11th-graders with a deeper understanding of
the process, the tasks involved, and questions that they should consider. Once
a student’s college list is finalized in the fall of grade 12, the focus of these
meetings turns toward the applications themselves, and continues as needed
until college admission decisions are released.
The college counselors also serve as liaisons to college admission offices, promoting an understanding of Cate
and each of our students to the colleges while sharing important information about college admission trends
and procedures with the School.
Although the College Counseling (CoCo) Office firmly believes that students must play the lead role
throughout the college application process, the counselors encourage parent participation as well. One-on-
46
< Table of ContentsCollege Counseling
one meetings with parents and students, as well as more general information sessions, are available for
parents in the late spring and early fall, and parents are encouraged to call or email our CoCo Office with
questions and concerns.
COLLEGE BOARD AND ACT TESTING
Cate organizes and supports standardized testing as an essential part of the college preparation and
application process. 10th and 11th-graders take the PSAT in October each year. We are a National Test
Center for the College Board, and in this capacity, we administer SAT and PSAT.
The School is not a test center for the ACT. Students taking the ACT should find a test center in their
home area or coordinate transportation to a local testing site. For more information, visit the ACT
website at www.actstudent.org. A test preparation course designed specifically for Cate students is offered
on campus for a fee; for students on financial aid, if your award covers the cost of tutoring the Office
of Financial Assistance will communicate to students’ families individual tutoring rates. For further
information, please contact the College Counseling Office directly.
OUTINGS WEEK AND COLLEGE TRIPS FOR
12TH- GRADE STUDENTS
During the annual Outings Week, most 12th-graders take the opportunity to visit schools on their college
application list. 12th-graders who do not take a college trip will participate in Outings Week. 12thgraders volunteer to assist the faculty as senior leaders on the 9th-, 10th- or 11th-grade camping trips. It is
important that 12th-graders wishing to participate in one of the 9th-, 10th- or 11th-grade trips understand
that they will be actively helping to lead these trips and that they take this leadership responsibility seriously.
Space for 12th-graders is limited, and as a result, placement on these trips is not guaranteed.
ADDITIONAL COLLEGE TRIPS FOR 12TH-GRADERS
In addition to those college visits taken over vacations and during Outings Week, students are permitted
to miss four (4) days of classes for college trips at any time during their 12th-grade year. Requests for these
trips must be submitted to the Student Services Office well in advance and should be in place of other
special permissions or voluntary school trips a 12th-grader may wish to take (e.g. Model UN conferences,
Round Square conferences, Los Niños, outdoor trips). Any trips beyond the four days will require approval
from the College Counseling Office, director of studies, and dean of students.
HONOR CODE
The School’s honor code sets the standards for student behavior. It is
intended to define common expectations, set limits for social behavior, and
foster a sense of responsibility for the School, others, and oneself. Students
are expected to meet the School’s expectations and standards, written and 
CATE STUDENT HANDBOOK
47
< Table of Contents
Community
Standards
implied, and accept full responsibility for their actions. Students are asked to
sign the honor code on all significant tests, projects, and papers as a reminder
and commitment to the expectations we live by on the Mesa.
On my honor, I pledge:
to be truthful;
to show respect for all members of the Cate community and their property;
to complete my work honorably without giving or receiving unauthorized help.
DAILY STANDARDS
Providing a positive and productive environment for all members of the community is a fundamental
goal of the School. To this end, the most impactful education about expectations and standards in the
community occurs between individual faculty members and students. Students are expected to be punctual to
commitments, to be considerate of others, to follow appropriate procedures for things like signing off/on the
Mesa and seeking weekend permissions, to help maintain their rooms and common spaces on campus, etc. It 
48
< Table of ContentsCommunity Standards
is the School’s philosophy that individual employees should respond to inappropriate behavior in clear, direct
ways – ways that most often entail face-to-face dialogue. Quite often, students respond to direct interaction
with an employee and a discussion is enough. However, sometimes the infraction is severe enough or frequent
enough to warrant a talk with or a disciplinary response from, the dean of students.
MINOR INFRACTIONS (MI)
Students should expect to receive a Student Behavior Notice in the form of an email whenever they earn
a minor infraction. Earning a minor infraction may not require additional response; however, three minor
infractions are the equivalent of a detention violation. In this case, the student who earned a detention
violation is responsible for serving a two-hour detention. Dorm personnel and chore-group leaders have
leeway in assigning alternate consequences for minor infractions that occur in the dorm.
Minor infractions include, but are not limited to:
• late to a commitment
• missing dinner sign-in
• failure to sign off or back on the Mesa (one or the other)
• failing chore check
• failing room inspection
• sleeping in
• not studying during the academic day
• not studying during study hours
• out of room after in-room check
• hosting a dorm mate after in-room check
• campus boundary violation
• helmet violation when riding a bike or skateboard
DETENTION VIOLATION (DV)
Students should expect to receive a Student Behavior Notice via email notification whenever they earn a
detention violation. Additionally, students who have earned a detention violation should expect to serve
two-hours of detention within a week of receiving the notification. Accumulating four or more unserved
detention hours will result in the loss of weekend privileges. Detention hours can be served Monday through
Thursday evening from 6:30 - 7:30 PM, and on Sundays from 4:00 - 6:00 PM on a weekly basis but note
that location(s) and time(s) are subject to change.
Detention violations include but are not limited to:
• accumulating three minor infractions
• unexcused absence from any school commitment (class, athletic practice, assembly, etc.)
• being in someone else’s dorm room without them present
• being more than five minutes late to evening dormitory check-in
• driving violations
• the use of candles, incense, etc.
• the use and/or possession of tobacco or nicotine products
• Not signing off & back on campus
DISCIPLINARY NOTICE
Students are placed on disciplinary notice if they earn five detention violations (or the equivalent) during
a trimester. Students can expect a midway check-in meeting with the assistant Dean of Students once they
have earned three detention violations (or the equivalent). If a student is placed on disciplinary notice, the
student and advisor will meet with the Dean of Students, parents are notified and that student is ineligible
for weekend permissions (unless specifically approved by the dean of students) until all disciplinary responses 
49
< Table of Contents
have been completed. If student earns two additional detention violations in that same trimester, for a total of
seven (or the equivalent), the student will meet with the Assistant Head for Students. Accumulating eight or
more detention violations (or the equivalent) generally will result in the Discipline Committee convening to
consider a more serious institutional response due to inability to manage school expectations.
# of Detention
Violations (DV)
Equivalent in Minor
Infractions (MI)
*Note 3MIs=1DV
What comes next?
5 DVs 15 MIs
Midway Check
Check-in meeting with the student and the
dean of students; the advisor will be notified.
7 DVs 21 MIs
Minor Disciplinary Notice
Official meeting with student, advisor, and
dean of students; parents notified.
9 DVs 27 MIs
Final Intervention
Official meeting with the student, advisor,
and assistant head of school for students;
parents notified.
10 DVs 30 MIs
Disciplinary Committee
Students will appear before the disciplinary
committee; parents will be notified.
MAJOR SCHOOL RULE VIOLATIONS
The following represents a set of guidelines to aid students and parents in understanding the School’s
fundamental expectations, but it should not be read or construed as an all-inclusive description of the
School’s standards, all of which are based on the tenets of the Honor Code – honesty, respect, and trust. Any
behavior that constitutes a serious breach of those expectations may be treated as an honor code violation and
result in convening the Discipline Committee or an administrative response. T dents and actively highlights
the importance of healing and mending trust and relationships that may be violated by poor choices.
Restorative practices include mediated discussions, educational projects, and various forms of community
service work on and off the Mesa.
Violations of the honor code – or being in the presence of another person violating it – generally result in the
convening of the Discipline Committee (explained later on) or Administrative Response.
The Honor Code describes broadly the way in which students should live their lives at Cate.
Major School Violations include, but are not limited to:
• leaving the Mesa after on-campus sign-in and 6:00 AM without appropriate communication and
permission
• violating interdorm policies
• possession of weapons 
50
< Table of ContentsCommunity Standards
• leaving the dorm after in-dorm times
• possession and/or use of alcohol, illegal drugs, unauthorized prescription or over-the-counter medication,
and drug paraphernalia (including vape devices)
• possession and/or use (on one’s self or others) of tattooing paraphernalia
• stealing
• cheating
• harassing, hazing, intimidating or threatening physical harm
Cheating and Plagiarism
Cate considers any form of intellectual and academic dishonesty a serious breach of community standards.
Academic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to, plagiarism; violations of stated policies for exams,
assessments, and homework assignments; unauthorized use of technology such as AI, including computers,
smartphones, and any device that can aid a student in retrieving information on exams, assessments, or
homework; presenting work completed by another student for credit or a grade; resubmitting a previously
graded assignment for credit in another class; intentionally participating in or helping another commit
academic dishonesty. Cheating and plagiarism are forms of theft – the theft of another’s ideas or exact
words. While students are often encouraged to discuss ideas with other students prior to writing a paper or
completing an assignment, such discussions may not include the exact wording of ideas or textual references.
In short, all students are responsible for the material they submit under their name.
Students can avoid committing plagiarism by indicating when an assignment has been completed in
collaboration with other students; citing all sources used in writing; and avoiding the use of ideas, phrases, or
passages from a written or internet source without giving accurate and appropriate credit. Students who are
aware that they are borrowing another’s thought (e.g. a critic’s conclusion about a book), should acknowledge
the source, even if the exact words have not been used. Moreover, students working with a tutor or a peer
should know that if their work has been improved beyond their recognized capabilities, they are in violation
of the Honor Code. Additionally, the School considers students who supply material to others just as guilty
of academic dishonesty as those who submit the work as their own. Students should always speak directly to
their teacher if they have any doubts about what is academically appropriate.
Students who cheat or plagiarize will meet with their teacher and/or the department chair or Dean of
Academics. The assessment/assignment will bear an academic penalty, parents will be notified, and the
Discipline Committee may convene to consider further measures.
Harassment and Other Inappropriate Conduct
Cate School is committed to providing an environment that is free from discrimination and harassment
and maintains a strict policy prohibiting all forms of unlawful harassment and discrimination based on race,
ethnic origin, religion, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, or any other protected class.
Discriminatory and/or harassing conduct, whether on or off school campus, in person or via social media, is a 
51
< Table of Contents
violation of the honor code. Such behavior can range from the subtle to the overt and can include, but is not
necessarily limited to:
• Actions or words degrading the race, ethnic or national origins, religion, gender, sexual orientation, or
physical characteristics of others.
• Behavior that interferes with the emotional, physical, economic, or educational well-being of the
recipient.
Moreover, Sexual harassment at Cate, whether verbal, physical, visual, or electronic, will not be tolerated.
Sexual harassment includes any:
• unwelcome sexual advances
• requests for sexual advances
• requests for sexual favors
• other unwelcome verbal, visual, or physical conduct of a sexual nature
Some specific examples of sexual harassment include but are not limited to:
• verbal harassment or abuse based on gender
• unwanted sexual behavior
• comments with sexual or demeaning implications
• pressure for sexual activity
• unwelcome patting, pinching, or brushing against another person’s body
• demands for sexual favors accompanied by implied or explicit threats
• the sending of sexually explicit or nude photos by email, over the internet, or by telephone.*
Cate also prohibits the possession and sharing of images containing sexual, pornographic, or other explicit
content.* In California, the act of possessing, sending or distributing sexually explicit photos depicting a
minor is illegal (see California Penal Code §§ 311.1 and 311.11).
Sexual Harassment Information and Resource Team
(SHIRT) - Assistant Head for Finance and Operations and Chair of SHIRT Sandi Pierce, Director of
Facilities and Master Planning Jules Nau, Director of Campus Life Erin Hansen, Senior Associate Director
of College Counseling Margot Dorion, Ceramics Teacher John Swain, Dean of Studies Annalee Salcedo and
Director of Human Resources Yutopia Essex.
*“Sexting” is specifically prohibited at Cate. Sexting is the electronic transmission of sexual messages
or pictures, usually through cell phone text messaging or other social media platforms or electronic
means. Sexual messages include, but are not limited to, transmitting sexually explicit words, phrases, or
conversations, sending, receiving, or retaining nude, partially nude, lewd, sexually explicit, or graphic
images of themselves or others; or graphic or sexually explicit messages. Such conduct is not only potentially
dangerous for the involved students but can lead to unwanted exposure of the messages and images to others,
and could result in direct violation of Cate’s sexual harassment policy and in criminal violations related to
the transmission or possession of child pornography. Such conduct will be subject to immediate discipline up
to and including expulsion and possible confiscation of the wireless communication device used to capture,
send, or receive sexting messages.
Incident Response Protocol
If a student has a concern, they can go to any trusted adult. By speaking up, they are helping the School
take better care of the community. Depending on the nature of the concern, the concern may be responded
to through the Dean’s Office, the Sexual Harassment Information and Resource Team (SHIRT), or the
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) Office.
Community Standards
52
< Table of Contents
The School utilizes a three-step incident response protocol: intake, investigation, and restoration. In some
cases, this may be an informal process while others will have a more formal school response. When a
complaint is made, the School follows all mandated-reporting requirements and determines appropriate
responses for confirmed instances of misconduct including incidences of sexual misconduct, harassment, and
discrimination. Potential responses include mediation and counseling, education, or disciplinary action up
to, and including, expulsion. Even in the absence of a formal complaint, an investigation may be required if
an incident comes to light in which school standards of behavior were not met.
While harassing behavior is unacceptable at Cate, we acknowledge that students may, on occasion, say things
that are hurtful without awareness or intention. We will support and empower those who were hurt while
additionally building accountability through concrete restitution plans for those who had a harmful impact.
Mandated Reporting
All incidents of sexual abuse, physical abuse, emotional abuse, neglect, and exposure to family violence must,
by law, be reported to Child Protective Services. Sexual abuse includes any sexual advances or sexual contact
made by an adult with a minor. At any time, a student has the right to retain the service of an attorney and/
or report an incident of sexual harassment or abuse directly to the police, Child Welfare Services, or the
Head of School. Additionally, we partner with Standing Together Against Sexual Assault (STESA) to provide
education and support services to our students and faculty.
ACADEMIC & STUDENT CONCERN REPORTING AND
INCIDENT RESPONSE PROTOCOL
Response Protocol
Cate is committed to working in partnership with students. By speaking up, students help the School do a
better job and take better care of the community. Policies are in place that allow students to communicate
their concerns without fear of retaliation or discipline. The Incident Response Protocol is utilized in instances
of harmful physical, relational, and emotional conduct, bullying, incidents of bias, and sexual assault which
includes sexual harassment.
Honor Council
The Honor Council consists of two representative 12th-graders, a faculty member, and the dean of students,
and it is convened at the request of the dean of students to determine whether a particular violation is
significant enough to warrant a Discipline Committee meeting. In the absence of such a recommendation,
the Honor Council may determine a response to the violation.
Discipline Committee
The Discipline Committee convenes to respond to Honor Code violations, repeated breaches of conduct,
or situations deemed serious enough in nature to warrant a formal institutional disciplinary response. The
Committee is comprised of five students (one 10th and one 11th, each elected to the position by
their peers; the two 12th grade head prefects; the Student Body President) and five faculty members (the
director of studies; the assistant head for students; one faculty member elected by colleagues; one faculty
member appointed by the head of school; the dean of students who chairs the committee).
Prior to the Discipline Committee meeting, the student(s) submits a detailed statement describing the
circumstances of their involvement in the incident. The student then sits before the committee (along with
their student advocate and advisor) to respond to questions and, more importantly, take advantage of the
opportunity to own their behaviors. After the student has left the room, both the student advocate and
advisor have the opportunity to respond to questions by the Committee, as well as offer their unique insights
about the student and the situation. Following this, the Committee retires to deliberate.
Community Standards
53
< Table of Contents
The job of the Committee is to render a response that takes into account several factors, most important
among them the balance between what’s best for the student(s) involved and the rest of the community.
The Committee weighs the nature of the violation, the circumstances surrounding the violation, the
disciplinary history of the student(s) before them, and the level of honesty and the level of responsibility
accepted by the perpetrator(s). The Committee makes a recommendation to the head of school, who reserves
the right to amend that recommendation. Drug testing is automatically assigned to students involved in
substance possession and/or abuse violations addressed by the Discipline Committee or the Administrator
Response team.
Administrative Response
On occasion, the School will choose not to convene the Discipline Committee and, instead, employ an
alternative disciplinary procedure. This is most often the case when the standard disciplinary procedure
would violate the privacy of the student(s) involved or the School, or when vacations, exams, etc., interfere
with the usual process. A small group of administrators will convene along with the Head of School to
determine an official school response to the violation/s.
Tiered Levels of Major School Violation Disciplinary Response Tiers
Violations will be rated low, medium, or high impact based on the circumstances of the major school rule
violations. Based on the severity of the violation and nuance associated with the infraction, students can
expect the School’s discipline response will fall in the range detailed below. In addition to the disciplinary
response, the student/s can also expect to play a role in developing a restorative work plan that focuses on
healing the negatively impacted relationships within the community.
IMPACT MAJOR SCHOOL RESPONSE RANGE
Low • Tier 1: 3 days to 2 weeks Restriction
Disciplinary Probation (possible)
Medium • Tier 2: 2 weeks restriction to 2 weeks suspension
Disciplinary Probation
High
• Tier 3: 2 weeks suspension-end of the year (option to return)
Disciplinary Probation
• Tier 4: Expulsion (no option to return)
Disciplinary Probation
Generally speaking, students who violate the Honor Code will be placed on Disciplinary Probation as part
of the School’s disciplinary response. For students placed on Disciplinary Probation, re-enrollment contracts
may be withheld pending a review by a faculty committee in the spring trimester and even as late as the end
of the school year. Students on Disciplinary Probation run a significant risk of being permanently separated
from the School for any violation – or series of violations– that would compel the Discipline Committee to
be convened.
Drug Testing Policy
Students found in possession and/ or use of illegal drugs, unauthorized prescription or over-the-counter
medication or drug paraphernalia will be subject to random substance use screenings throughout their
remaining tenure at Cate to verify non-use. The results of this screening will be reported to the Dean of
Students. Drug testing is automatically assigned to students involved in substance possession and/or abuse
violations addressed by the Discipline Committee or the Administrator Response team.
Community Standards
54
< Table of Contents
College Disciplinary Notification
At Cate, we believe:
• In the power of learning in all of its forms, including that which we discover from poor choices or errors
in judgment
• In consequences and repercussions that are appropriate, timely, and finite
• In the maturation process, in growing and becoming, and in a unique manner every student travels their
road to understanding and self-awareness
• In privacy, in equity, in personal moments that need not and should not be public moments
• In our students, who we present to the world as authentic, distinct human beings
• For these reasons, Cate School policy prohibits the disclosure of high school disciplinary records to
colleges and universities in most cases.
If a student has been disciplined at Cate School for acts involving violence, physical force or the threat
of physical force, a sexual offense, possession of a weapon, kidnapping, arson, or any offense that caused
physical harm to another person, that student should plan to answer “yes” to questions about discipline in the
Common Application and/or individual colleges/universities’ applications. Further, the student should plan
to work with the Cate School College Office in order to craft a statement specific to the questions asked in
the application(s).
Some college applications ask the student whether the applicant has ever been placed on probation or
suspended or expelled during high school. It’s incumbent upon the student to answer honestly; the College
Counseling Office will confirm that the student has provided a statement to all colleges, universities,
scholarship programs, or educational programs that request such information while simultaneously acting as
an advocate on the student’s behalf.
While disciplinary infractions are a concern, Cate’s experience is that colleges understand that young people
make mistakes. Admissions committees are typically more concerned with the quality and tone of a student’s
explanation. An honest and thoughtful response to a disciplinary matter can demonstrate a student’s
development and maturity.
HEALTH & WELLNESS PROTOCOL
Our students’ health is of paramount importance. We do not want students to hesitate to seek the School’s
help for themselves or other students when there may be medical or behavioral concerns.
If School rules or standards for conduct have been violated, the Health and Wellness Protocol provides an
opportunity to get support for a student in need. The Health and Wellness Protocol provides students with
a means of accessing support in situations where there is concern about the use of controlled substances or
school standards of conduct have been violated and/or when students are concerned about the immediate
safety of another student(s) (including themselves) who are under the influence of drugs or alcohol or need
immediate medical attention – all without incurring disciplinary consequences. This protocol is designed
to provide students in need with access to medical, educational, and therapeutic help. However, the Health
and Wellness Protocol will not shield a student from disciplinary consequences if an investigation has already
been set in motion by a faculty member and/or it’s determined that a student’s behavior is particularly
harmful or egregious to the greater community (e.g., theft or distributing/selling drugs or alcohol).
It is important to note that the Health and Wellness Protocol depends on honest and forthright conversations
between the student and Health and Wellness Committee members. The protocol was created to address
the totality of a student’s health and wellness. So, the Health and Wellness Committee members who
communicate with a student under the Health and Wellness Protocol anticipate full disclosure of the issues
at hand. Suppose it is discovered that there is dishonesty or omission of information during the process. In
that case, the violation will no longer be covered under the Health and Wellness Protocol, and the dean of
Community Standards
55
< Table of Contents
students will initiate a disciplinary response. The program is not designed to address integrity issues such as
academic dishonesty or theft.
While using the health and wellness protocol means that no disciplinary response will be administered, all
information presented to a Health and Wellness Committee member will result in an intervention at one of
three levels.
SEXUAL INTIMACY POLICY
The School believes that teenagers, regardless of their sexual orientation, are not fully prepared to make
informed decisions about sexual intimacy. For these reasons, the School expects students to abstain from
sexual intimacy while they are under school jurisdiction. We recognize, however, that students will ultimately
make their own decisions about intimacy. Therefore, we provide education, health and counseling support,
and access to resources that will help students make responsible, respectful, and healthy decisions regarding
sexual intimacy and minimize potential risks.
Part of that education is provided through human development and residential programs. We have direct
and honest communication with students to give them age-appropriate information. By teaching specific
communication skills, educating students about consent and California law, providing opportunities for
open and private dialogue, and delivering relevant curricula, students acquire knowledge and develop their
decision-making and communication skills to make well-informed decisions regarding relationships and
sexual intimacy.
In addition, we provide counseling in the Ellis House through our Counseling Services Department.
Contraception and counseling are available at the Ellis House through the Health Services Department, and
students can be referred to off-campus health services upon request. Our medical director, director of health
services, and our director of counseling visit the dormitories periodically to educate residents and allow
students to ask questions. Students may also schedule a private appointment to speak with either one of these
practitioners. Finally, the residential faculty provides responsible supervision in dorms and around campus.
If it becomes known to faculty or staff that specific students have engaged in intimacy that runs
contrary to the cultivation of a safe and healthy environment or potentially infringes on the comfort or
well-being of others in the community, the students will be referred to the dean of campus life.
The director of campus life will collaborate with the Ellis House to determine a plan of action.
TECHNOLOGY
Acceptable Use Policy
Users of the School’s network are required to comply with the ethical and legal protocols established by the
School to ensure productive, successful, and ethical use of the network. The School expects honest and ethical
use of computers with respect to the privacy and rights of others and observation of state and federal laws, in
Community Standards
56
< Table of Contents
addition to laws from other countries and jurisdictions, where applicable.
The School considers access to CateNet (Cate network) services a privilege, not a right. Users of this
technology are required to comply with the ethical and legal protocols established by the School to ensure the
most successful and productive use of CateNet and the powerful resources of the Internet by all members of
the community. Cate may suspend, block or restrict access to an account when it appears necessary to do so:
a) to protect the integrity, security, or functionality of the School or other IT resources;
b) to comply with legal or contractual requirements;
c) to investigate alleged or potential violations of law or policy including, without limitation, state, federal,
or local law, in addition to laws from other countries and jurisdictions;
d) to investigate any asserted, threatened or potential complaint or grievance filed or credibly alleged
pursuant to law or Cate use rules, regulations, policies, or subject of law enforcement review or investigation;
e) or to protect the School from liability or disruption. Cate may also refer suspected violations of law to
appropriate law enforcement agencies for further investigation or action.
Misuse of the School’s network may result in the loss of access privileges and additional disciplinary action by
the School. All rules, including those pertaining to harassment and dishonesty, apply to all technology use.
Certain violations may result in separation from the School.
Specific Guidelines
CateNet and network resources are considered the property of Cate School, and Cate reserves the right to
access individual accounts and documents at its discretion. Thus, no Cate users, including students, have any
reasonable expectation of privacy in the use of CateNet and network resources.
Utilization of the School’s network to access the Internet during the academic day or study hours is primarily
for academic purposes and in support of and consistent with the School’s educational objectives. Gaming or
streaming demands a considerable amount of bandwidth and is prohibited during the academic day. Use of
the Internet outside the academic day or study hours is available, provided the use guidelines are followed.
All students are expected to abide by the generally accepted standards of responsible conduct on the Internet.
Guidelines regulating the use of CateNet include, but are not limited to, the following:
• Activities that violate the School’s Honor Code are prohibited.
• Accessing the accounts and files of others is prohibited.
• Attempting to subvert network security, impair functionality of the network, or bypass restrictions set
by the administrators is prohibited. Assisting others in violating these rules by sharing information or
passwords is also considered unacceptable behavior.
Community Standards
57
< Table of Contents
• Improper use or distribution of information obtained through the network (e.g., copyrighted material)
is prohibited. The network is an academic resource, and its use thereof is governed by the same rules as
library resources.
• Using the network for commercial purposes or in support of illegal activities is prohibited.
• Network resources and files are the property of Cate School.
• Confidential personal information should not be provided to others via the network.
• Accessing sexually oriented material and pornography or participating in sexually oriented
communication is prohibited.
• Sending electronic messages of a harassing, intimidating, offensive, or discriminatory nature is prohibited.
• Available bandwidth is a shared resource for the entire Cate community and should be treated as such
with respect for the rights of others using this resource; hence, bandwidth usage during the academic day
is reserved for academic purposes.
OFF-CAMPUS PERMISSIONS
Neighboring Properties
It is important that students respect the property lines of Cate’s neighbors. Students should never wander
through the avocado orchards that surround the base of campus, and they should not cross the fencing that
separates Cate’s property from that of its neighbors to the mountainside. While we sometimes enter this
premise to access our remote mountain property called Bee Camp, we do so only with advance permission
and under the guidance of trained faculty and staff.
Dinner Requests
A Cate parent/guardian may take boarding students (your child and friends of your child) to dinner by filling
out a Day Leave Request on Reach. As much advance notice as possible is greatly appreciated. If your request
will conflict with an evening commitment, special permission from the Student Services Office will be
necessary by 12:00 noon on the day requested.
Boarder Expectations When Hosted by Day Families
Students are able to use their allotted weekends to stay off campus with Day Student Families. Students
must submit all weekend requests on Reach before 4:00 PM on the Wednesday prior to the weekend. Host
parents/guardians, as well as the Boarder’s parents/guardians, will need to approve the weekend request via
email sent from Reach ASAP so that the request can be approved by the Dean of Students Office before
the requested weekend. Students and parents are expected to maintain and support consistent standards for
student behaviors, regardless of the event, when hosting any Cate Student. The School strongly encourages
students and their parents to be familiar with these guidelines.
The following guidelines were developed through the joint effort of the School, the Cate Parents
Organization, and Cate students to help provide parents and students with clear, safe, and responsible
guidelines for student gatherings. The process that developed these expectations demonstrates the nature
of the partnership that we – the school, parents, and students – have entered. It is our responsibility, as the
adults in this triad, to ensure that our messages to adolescents are not mixed, and it is our obligation to
maintain and support consistent standards for student behavior, regardless of the event. The School strongly
encourages students and their parents to be familiar with these guidelines.
Communication
Honest and timely communication between parents/guardians and students, between students and students,
and among students, parents, and the School is essential to safe, happy, and productive gatherings for
your children. Parents/guardians of guests are strongly encouraged to contact host parents to verify both
the arrangements and the activities of their child. Host parents/guardians are encouraged to communicate
directly with the parents of guests and the School about problems during Cate student gatherings. Such
Community Standards
58
< Table of Contents
communication should take place immediately and be conducted in a fashion that promotes further
conversation and a better understanding of the behavior of the students.
Curfews
Host parents/guardians are encouraged to set appropriate curfews for student guests and to communicate
clear curfew expectations to the students in their charge.
Off-Campus Permissions
Whenever students leave the Mesa, they are required to sign out (if going to Carpinteria) or fill out a leave
request on Reach (if you are going anywhere outside of Carpinteria), depending on their destination. These
systems can be accessed on their phones (if they’ve downloaded the Reach app) or on their laptops. Upon
their return, they must sign back in on Reach to Unknown Location on Campus or tap back in on any NFC
tag around campus. It’s the student’s responsibility to notify the MOD of any unavoidable delay in returning
to the Mesa. Such notification, however, does not constitute special permission or an excused late return. If
there are any technical issues, you must notify the MOD immediately before departing campus. Without
student cooperation in this regard, it is impossible to determine the whereabouts of students in the event of
an emergency, and may result in a response from the Dean’s Office or the MOD.
Seniors (only) may sign off/on the Mesa on weekdays between 6:00 AM and 7:45 PM, provided they do
not miss any school commitments. Non-senior students, including non-senior day students, may not leave
the Mesa during the academic day (including between classes and athletics). Permission from the Student
Services Office is required for a student to leave the Mesa before 6:00 AM or after 7:45 PM. This permission
will be granted only on the condition that transportation off the Mesa is provided by a Cate parent, with a
faculty member or driver approved by the Dean of Students Office.
During the school week, students may sign out to leave the Mesa via the school shuttle to Carpinteria on
Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday afternoons from 5:00 – 7:00 PM. In addition, students may submit a Day
Leave on Reach to be off campus from after Sports till Campus sign-in at 7:45 PM with a Cate parent or
faculty member Tuesday-Friday (optional 9:00 PM return time on N-Fridays only).
On weekends, after their last commitment on S-Saturdays and after 6:00 AM on N-Saturdays and Sundays,
students may submit a Day Leave to be off the Mesa and return by 7:45 PM. If they would like to remain off
campus until 9:00 PM on Saturdays, they or their parents must request approval from the MOD on duty.
If any student returns after 7:45 PM for any reason (late night/weekend permissions, traffic, etc), a face-toface check-in with the dorm faculty on duty is required.
Special Permissions and Allocations
Any off-campus permission that requires a student (boarding or day) to miss a school commitment is
termed a ‘special permission.’ Circumstances sometimes arise when a student misses a school commitment
is necessary and unavoidable. In such cases, students will need to submit a Special Permission Request on
Reach well in advance (1 week or more notice is ideal) to complete the necessary steps to have the absence
approved. (If a student is missing class, they must also complete the Leave Request Work Plan found on the
Community Standards
59
< Table of Contents
Student Portal and Schoology Student Resources.) Early communication will help ensure that teachers
and students are able to plan out the student’s workload without sacrificing quality. Ultimately, students
are responsible for completing all academic work, and teachers will not be available for extra help beyond
normal expectations. Before requesting special permission to miss classes, parents and students should
take into account the School’s attendance policy in the Academic Life section of this handbook. If a
family does not seek and gain approval for special permission, any subsequent absence will be considered
unexcused.
Late Night and Weekend Permissions
The School’s ‘N’ weekends generally allow students and faculty to enjoy a ‘full weekend.’ While students
have the opportunity to get away from the Mesa, they are allocated weekend permissions by grade level
(see allocations below). Occasionally, the School designates a weekend as “closed,” which means that
boarding students may not leave campus for the night. To view which weekends are closed, visit the
student and parent calendars.
For all permissions below, students are expected to submit their requests via Reach by 4:00 PM on the
Wednesday prior to the weekend in question, sign out and back on to campus appropriately, and face-toface check-in with dorm faculty on duty when they return to campus.
Reach keeps track of the allotted weekends by grade per trimester. If special permission is needed for an
additional weekend or you have maxed out your allotted weekends, you will need to contact the Dean of
Students Office for approval. Students in good standing may take the following number of late nights and
weekends during the year:
Ninth Grade Fall Winter Spring
Late Nights 1 1 1
Short Weekends 1* 1 1
Long Weekends 1* 1 1
Eleventh Grade Fall Winter Spring
Late Nights 2 2 3
Short Weekends 2 2 2
Long Weekends 1 2 2
Tenth Grade Fall Winter Spring
Late Nights 1 2 2
Short Weekends 1* 1 2
Long Weekends 1* 1 1
Twelfth Grade Fall Winter Spring
Late Nights 3 3 unlimited
Short Weekends 2 3 3
Long Weekends 2 2 2
*9th graders are eligible for their ‘late night’ permission after Outings Week and their long and short
weekend permissions after Fall Family Weekend.
Late Night Permissions
‘Late nights’ are off-campus permissions that extend past dinner on Friday and Saturday nights and
can begin after a student’s last commitment. Students with late-night permission on N-Fridays and
Saturdays must return by 11:15 PM. Students must sign out and back on via Reach. Upon your return,
a face-to-face check-in with the dorm faculty on duty is required. Any arrival past 11:15 PM will require
special permission from the Dean of Students or the MOD in advance. Failure to communicate in
advance will result in a response from the Dean of Students or the MOD.
Short Weekend Permissions
‘Short weekends’ are off-campus permissions that allow a student to spend one night in an approved
location on N-Friday or Saturday nights, can begin after a student’s last commitment and end at 7:45 PM
on the evening following the date of departure. Students must sign out and back on in Reach and face-toCommunity Standards
< Table of Contents
face
check-in with dorm faculty on duty.
Long Weekend Permissions
‘Long weekends’ are off-campus permissions that allow a student to spend two nights in an approved
location on ‘N’ weekends, can begin after a student’s last commitment on Friday and end at 10:00 PM on
Sunday. Students must sign out and back on via Reach and must do a face-to-face check-in with dorm
faculty on duty.
Day Students
Please review the day students & parents section in this handbook for details about spending the night on
the Mesa.
Overnights to Faculty Homes on the Mesa
Generally, there are several faculty children enrolled at Cate who reside on campus. Although technically, day
students their homes are on the campus, so boarding students are granted one additional short weekend per
trimester to stay overnight at these homes if invited. Boarders who wish to take a second weekend at a faculty
member’s home within the same trimester must use one of their allotted weekends.
Off-Campus Overnights
In support of many programs offered at Cate, there are often opportunities for students to travel off campus.
These opportunities include overnight trips in the outdoors like Outings Week, travel to Los Niños, Round
Square conferences, MUN, college visits, and other service and program activities. For such off-campus
school-sponsored trips, leave will be submitted on behalf of the office manager in the student services office
on Reach, and these trips will not count toward your weekend allotted overnights.
Similar to the way we house students on campus when traveling, students will be assigned shared sleeping
arrangements based on the gender of the dorm they reside in (male, female, and all-gender). Day students
will be assigned based on dorm affiliation or the gender they indicate. When an all-gender sleeping area is not
available, trip leaders will work with students individually to determine their placement. Trip leaders are
responsible for assigning accommodations. Shared overnight accommodations are intended as opportunities
to support programming and promote healthy social interactions, not for sexual intimacy. This policy is
meant to address accommodations and to ensure student health and safety while traveling away from campus.
Community Standards
60
61
< Table of Contents
VACATION BREAKS & TRAVEL
Throughout the year, there are several breaks during which the students must depart campus. Fall,
Winter, Spring, and Summer Breaks can be found on the important dates. The School does not provide
accommodations for students during these breaks. You are responsible for making your own travel
arrangements (flights, trains, etc.) to and from vacation break locations; however, assistance with departure
and return transportation for Boarders (shuttles to and from LAX & SBA) on vacation travel days and at
the end of the school year is available. Students are reminded one month prior to each break to fill out their
travel information and transportation needs on Reach. Parents will be sent an email from Reach to approve
such plans. Parents must request changes to School-provided transportation within forty-eight hours of pick
up or drop off. Students will earn a DV if the transportation is not used as scheduled. Please note that the
School does not provide transportation to the Mesa at the beginning of the school year. Late travel plans
submitted to the Student Services Office Manager are subject to disciplinary response.
Transportation Details
We provide transportation for boarders who depart from and return to the following hubs:
• Los Angeles International Airport
(LAX - an Airbus ticket will be purchased and charged to your student account)
• Santa Barbara Airport (SBA)
We do not provide transportation for students who choose to depart from or return to Bob Hope Airport
(BUR) or other locations. Before booking flights, please read the airport and train station information
below and be familiar with your airline’s unaccompanied minor policy. Cate faculty are not able to
accompany students inside the airports or to their gates, so please make sure your child is old enough to fly
unaccompanied on your selected airline (ages vary from one airline to the next).
Please notice that school commitments (in addition to classes) continue until 3:00 PM on the last day before
the Fall, Winter, and Spring break. Students are not granted special permission to miss commitments for
travel convenience before or after any break; they are asked to travel on our designated travel days and times.
The Student Services Office Manager will coordinate transportation to and from the following hubs if
requested on Reach by students traveling on the designated travel days and within the designated travel times.
Community Standards
62
< Table of Contents
Breaks Departure Days Return Day
Opening
of School
August 11 (Preseason) -
August 24 (Returners)
*No Return Transportation Provided
Fall
Break
Friday Nov. 22
(regular class day until 3:00 p.m.)
• Students may depart between
3:00 p.m. - 10:00 p.m. from Campus
• Flights must Depart from LAX
after 10:30 p.m. (11:30 p.m. for
international flights) or SBA after
5:30 p.m.
• Departures outside of the time frame
above requires the Dean of Students’
and Dean of Academics (if missing
classes) before Friday, Nov. 8
Saturday Nov. 23
(designated departure travel day)
• Students must depart between
3:40 a.m. -3:00 p.m. from Campus
• Flights must depart from LAX after
8:15 a.m. or SBA after 6:00 a.m.
• Dormitories will close and all
students must be off Campus
by 3:00 p.m.
Monday Dec. 2
(students may not arrive earlier
Dec. 2 at 8am, the dorms will be
locked and unsupervised)
• Students must return to Campus
between 8:00 a.m. - 7:30 p.m.
• Flights must arrive at LAX before
4:30 p.m. or SBA before 6:30 p.m.
• Returners outside of the time frame
above requires the Dean of Students’
and Dean of Academics (if missing
classes) before Friday, Nov. 8
Winter
Break
Friday Dec. 20
(regular class day until 3:00 p.m.)
• Students may depart between
3:00 p.m. - 10:00 p.m. from Campus
• Flights must Depart from LAX
after 10:30 p.m. (11:30 p.m.
for international flights) or
SBA after 5:30 p.m.
• Departures outside of the time frame
above requires the Dean of Students’
and Dean of Academics (if missing
classes) before Friday, Dec. 6
Saturday Dec. 21
(designated departure travel day)
• Students must depart between
3:40 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. from Campus
• Flights must depart from LAX after
8:15 a.m. or SBA after 6:00 a.m.
• Dormitories will close and all
students must be off Campus
by 3:00 p.m.
Tuesday Jan. 7
(students may not arrive earlier Jan. 7
at 8am, the dorms will be locked and
unsupervised)
• Students must return to Campus
between 8:00 a.m. - 7:30 p.m.
• Flights must arrive at LAX before
4:30 p.m. or SBA before 6:30 p.m.
• Returners outside of the time frame
above requires the Dean of Students’
and Dean of Academics (if missing
classes) before Friday, Dec. 6
Spring
Break
Friday Feb. 28
(regular class day until 3:00 p.m.)
• Students may depart between
3:00 p.m. - 10:00 p.m. from Campus
• Flights must Depart from LAX
after 10:30 p.m. (11:30 p.m. for
international flights) or SBA after
5:30 p.m.
• Departures outside of the time frame
above requires the Dean of Students’
and Dean of Academics (if missing
classes) before Friday, Feb. 14
Saturday Mar. 1
(designated departure travel day)
• Students must depart between
3:40 a.m. -3:00 p.m. from Campus
• Flights must depart from LAX after
8:15 a.m. or SBA after 6:00 a.m.
• Dormitories will close and all
students must be off Campus
by 3:00 p.m.
Sunday Mar. 16 (all 11th graders
return for SATs) or (9th,10th, &12th
grade return) Monday Mar. 17
(students may not arrive earlier
Mar. 17 at 8am, the dorms will be
locked and unsupervised)
• Students must return to Campus
between 8:00 a.m. - 7:30 p.m.
• Flights must arrive at LAX before
4:30 p.m. or SBA before 6:30 p.m.
• Returners outside of the time frame
above requires the Dean of Students’
and Dean of Academics (if missing
classes) before Friday, Feb. 14
End of
The Year
Friday May 30
(regular class day until 3:00 p.m.)
• Students may depart between
3:00 p.m. - 10:00 p.m. from Campus
• Flights must Depart from LAX
after 10:30 p.m. (11:30 p.m. for
international flights) or SBA
after 5:30 p.m.
• Departures outside of the time frame
above requires the Dean of Students’
and Dean of Academics (if missing
classes) before Friday, May 16
Saturday May 31
(designated departure travel day)
• Students must depart between
3:40 a.m. -3:00 p.m. from Campus
• Flights must depart from LAX after
8:15 a.m. or SBA after 6:00 a.m.
• Dormitories will close and all
students must be off Campus by
3:00 p.m.
Community Standards
63
< Table of Contents
Airbus Returns from LAX to Carpinteria
Depart LAX Arrive Carpinteria
8:00 AM 10:15 AM
10:30 AM 12:45 PM
12:30 PM 2:45 PM
2:00 PM 4:15 PM
3:30 PM 6:10 PM
5:30 PM 8:10 PM
 **Airbus shuttles after 5:30 PM are to be used for
emergencies only
Airbus Departures from Carpinteria to LAX
Depart Carpinteria Arrive LAX
4:10 AM 6:15 AM
6:10 AM 8:30 AM
7:40 AM 10:00 AM
9:10 AM 11:30 AM
10:40 AM 1:00 PM
12:40 PM 3:15 PM
3:10 PM 6:00 PM
6:40 PM 9:00 PM
Community Standards
Travel Tips
To ensure that students are prepared for travel, they should
• understand their travel itinerary;
• travel with identification and sufficient money;
• know when and where to get any necessary tickets/boarding passes;
• have a contingency plan for contact if there are problems during travel;
• carry a cell phone for communication in an emergency.
Travel Challenges
In the event of travel snags at the beginning or end of vacation breaks, students and parents are responsible
for notifying the MOD (805-698-4808) as soon as possible. In some instances, the office manager in
the Student Services Office can assist with changes in airbus times and or transportation if traveling on a
designated travel day.
Foreign Passports and I-20 Forms
Students holding foreign passports and student visas are required by federal law to file I-20 forms, which are
prepared by the Admission Office. Failure to present the proper documentation when re-entering the United
States may result in denial of entry or lengthy detention at the port of entry. In most cases, a passport must
be valid for six months beyond the period of stay in the United States. Please check the passport expiration
requirements for traveling from your country to the United States. Checking ahead of time will prevent the
possibility of being turned away at immigration, if not at the departure airport.
This Hanbook was last updated on 10/28/24
If you are traveling to LAX and you have requested transportation, then a Santa Barbara Airbus ticket will be
purchased, and transportation to/from the bus will be coordinated. Ticket costs ($50) are billed to student
accounts. Airbus tickets must be canceled no later than 24 hours before the travel date and time; otherwise,
you may be charged for the unused ticket. Although the Santa Barbara Airbus has many departures and
return shuttles each day, we have outlined below the times that work with the school’s schedule. Please review
these times before making departure or return flight plans. 
CATE SCHOOL
1960 Cate Mesa Road
Carpinteria, CA 93013